ELSEVIER Lingua 110(2000)931-935 www.elsevier.nI/locate/lingu;l Book review Peter V. Lamarque (ed.), The concise encyclopedia @philosophy qf language. Oxford: Pergamon, 1997. Milena Nuti, Department of Linguistics, University College London. Gower Street, London WCIE 6BT, UK.* The concise encyclopedia of philosophy of language is based on the philosophy entries from the well received Encyclopedia of language and linguistics (ELL); at the core of the new volume are the 80 or so articles commissioned in the late 1980s and early 1990s for the 10 volume ELL (edited by R.E. Asher, 1994) for which Lamarque was philosophy subject editor. The editor™s foretiord sets out how the volume was conceived and how it is organised. It is admirably short (3 pages) and very clear, saying many of the general things that need to be considered with regard to a work such as this. The list of con- tributors is impressive. In just under 600 pages there are 152 entries divided into 3 main kinds: _ Key figures. These biographical entries are of varying lengths and detail and, because the original publication, the ELL, was devoted to language and linguistics rather than philosophy, the fullest are those devoted to figures in linguistics while figures in philosophy are often dealt with very briefly. All the classic big names are covered, and entries are concise and informative. Newmeyer™s Chomsky is particularly thorough. The focus of these entries is mainly on works and contri- butions to the subject, rather than on biographical details. There are a few other names who might usefully have been included, given the significance of their work on problems of interest to both philosophers of language and linguists. For example, there are no entries on Evans (reference and donkey sentences): Kaplan or Montague; Searle (speech acts); Fodor, Dretske or Millikan (theories of mean- ing). As what was traditionally conceived of as philosophy of language broadens, so too should our perception of key contributors. _ Partic,ular ideas or specialist terms. ﬁThe purpose of these entries is, in a rela- tively concise way, to explain the meanings of the terms and their place in philo- sophical debatesﬂ (p. xviii). Examples are a priori, analyticity, ontological com- * E-mail: m.nuti@ucl.ac.uk 037%2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-384 I (0O)OOOl I-S 932 Book review I Linguu 110 (2000) 931-935 mitment. Here the entries are performing the function more of a dictionary than an encyclopedia and are brief, to the point and clearly stated. - Overviews. There are two kinds of overview entry: the first kind are ﬁsurveys of intellectual territory . . . [the] point of these is to sketch out an area of enquiry, drawing a map on which specific debates are located and contextualized . . . [they] often involve accounting for the historical development of ideasﬂ (p. xviii). The entries on meaning: philosophical theories and semiotics are examples. The sec- ond ﬁkind of survey article tracks, not historically but intellectually, a particular area of contention, perhaps around a problematic concept or hypothesis, perhaps connected to a particular school of thoughtﬂ (p. xviii). Entries on deconstruction, rules, truth, presupposition, among others, come under this grouping. Both kinds of overview offer considerable scope for partial presentation and intellectual axe- grinding. These different kinds of articles are grouped thematically in sections, then alpha- betically within sections (for the volume is called an encyclopedia) rather than by type of entry, except for the biographies which are all placed at the end of the vol- ume. The sections are entitled: - Language, metaphysics, and ontology - Language and mind - Truth and meaning - Reference - Language and logic - Formal semantics - Pragmatics and speech act theory - Key figures: Pre-20th century and 20th century (the purpose of this division is unclear) Clearly there will be some overlap between the different headings. However there are a few odd choices as to what topic goes where. The entry on communica- tion comes under ‚Truth and meaning™, and is not even cross-referenced to ‚Prag- matics™. Under ‚Language and mind™ we find the entry on shared knowledge is just one page long, giving scant treatment to an issue of considerable importance in the area of ‚Pragmatics™. In general a worry about the key-concept type of entry (and it is not always clear what justifies a certain topic getting the treatment of one or other kind of entry) is that important topics are cursorily dealt with. Also given the standard of the authors, it seems a shame that there is no room to develop further any discussion of their topics (e.g. Forbes™ de ditto/de re, Oliver™s ontology and universals, Carston™s language of thought). Some entries are so short (e.g. holism, indeterminacy of translation, and a priori), that anyone not already familiar with the concepts might well find them too condensed. More- over, anyone who is already familiar with the concept will not find anything new. Indeed, given the length of some of these articles, the fact that they are written by experts in the field is neither here nor there, because they don™t have enough space to develop any ideas, although the big names will certainly help to sell the book. The criteria for choosing contributors are not set out, although academic distinc- tion is clearly pre-eminent (Davies, Hookway, Cottingham, Baldwin, Travis. Kemp- son, Sainsbury, to name a few). Very few contributors are not working in Britain (the Dutch semanticists are the exception), and there is little representation of Amer- ican points of view (to the detriment of the section on ‚Language and mind™). In such an enormous and multidisciplinary field, few could be expected to recognise all the contributors, but it is a tribute to the editor™s control over this work that most are of such quality; deviant logics, for instance, are outside my area of knowledge so. test- ing the usefulness of the encyclopedia by learning from it, I found Haak™s entry clear, balanced and extremely informative. Lamarque™s introductory remarks state that ﬁthe intended readership of the vol- ume is diverse, including those already knowledgeable about the subject. seeking to consolidate or build on their knowledge, as well as those looking for basic informa- tion or just starting outﬂ. We are to look at the ﬁresource as a reference work and also to dip into for the intrinsic interest of the subject matterﬂ (p. xix). Aiming at such a broad-based audience raises issues about coverage and about levels of complexity and detail of the entries. In particular, it is important that unini- tiated readers be informed of alternative points of view. Philosophy of language is an area where, not surprisingly, both individuals and ‚schools™ have strongly held. divergent views on most topics, which tend to be forcefully argued for. The fore- word claims. ﬁit would be hard to think of better qualified authors than . . writing on . .ﬂ (p. xvii). Given the list of names and associated topics. this claim is by and large justified. (A cross-sectional sample could be Horwich on truth, Janssen on compositionality, Mey on pragmatics). However. this is not necessarily the same as achieving representational balance (either by multiple entries on the same topic, with balance provided externally by the reader™s use of cross referencing between the associated entries. or by the fair representation of different approaches in a single entry). Horwich™s entry on truth is an exceptionally clear and even-handed statement of the problem of truth and its place in philosophy of language; Janssen™s treatment of compositionality reveals a Montagovian bias; while Mey™s entry on pragmatics is merely a polemic (see below). It would be interesting to know whether contributors were given a brief to work to and, if so, exactly what that was. There are some particularly good entries, as would be expected from such emi- nent contributors and this volume works well when people like Steedman and Williamson discuss their specialist topics. It is not always clear what justifies the length (or brevity) of some of the contributions: semiotics gets 13 pages, literary structuralism and semiotics gets 17 pages; ordinary language philosophy gets two. as does analyticity, and logical positivism gets one. Other philosophical terms also get relatively brief entries, perhaps consistent with their being originally contributions to a much larger work on language and linguistics. This is a shadow which hangs over the depth of coverage of many of the entries. It is to be feared they have lost some of their cross referencing and, at times, bibliographies and leads to other work seem a bit brief. Some articles are much more technical than others. undermining the broad-based readership aim. Generally, the presentation is clear and easy on the eye, though some entries appear to have been less thoroughly proof-read than others. Fre- 934 Book reliew I Lingua 110 (2000) 931-935 quently sentences in compositionality of meaning, for example, are exceptionally hard to process. To encapsulate a whole subject in an encyclopaedia is clearly demanding. There is the problem of how narrowly to conceive of the subject ‚philosophy of language™. An editor of a volume like this needs to consider whether work by theoretical lin- guists and psychologists, and not just that of professional philosophers should be covered since, after all, they are all interested in the same sorts of fundamental ques- tions about meaning, reference, semantics, signs. Contributions of a more empirical nature have here been included. These are not, strictly speaking, philosophical but are ﬁlikely to be of interest to philosophers who are not familiar with such work . . . open[ing] up the wider context within which issues of a more strictly philosophical character are debatedﬂ (p. xvii). By this token, material both on ‚theory of mind™ and evolutionary psychology should have been included. There is no entry on dynamic semantics, although Montague grammar (now mostly only considered for historical interest), situation semantics (while surely very good, is not written by practising sit- uation semanticists, indeed it is written by practising dynamic semanticists) and game theoretical semantics are all represented. There is nothing on the semantics of questions. Nothing on Williams syndrome, autism and, extraordinarily, no evolu- tionary entry despite huge interest (among philosophers too) in the evolutionary and developmental origins of language and cognition. It might be argued that none of this counts as philosophy of language, but I think it is at least as relevant as semi- otics, and the entry on apes and language that is present (which while written by some big names does not represent alternative views in what is a highly contentious field with many interdisciplinary repercussions). Some topics yield better to the kind of analysis found in encyclopedia entries than do others: those with well established methods of work, those with a settled and agreed history, those without contention as to meanings of terms, definition of subject matter, or relationship to other disciplines. But for some topics, particularly in recent research, all of this and more is in dispute. Such a subject area is pragmat- its, here quite rightly given a section to itself. However, the section is ill-served, both by the overview and the rest of the section built around it. Given the high qual- ity of the other sections this is regrettable. Pragmatics is presented as lacking any well-determined area of investigation. There are indeed a lot of different views about pragmatics; unfortunately the views of most significance to people interested in the philosophy of language are not at all represented in Mey™s entry. His overview is a polemic about certain views of language, and disregards alternatives: his approach is non-theoretical, unscientific and concerned with socio-linguistic dis- course analysis. Its inappropriateness for this volume is exemplified by its misrep- resentation of Grice™s work. (The entry on Grice does not really redress the balance for it is a hasty addition to the ‚Key figures™ section of the encyclopedia and does little to spell out the importance of his work as the foundation of much research developing theories of communication). Organisationally, the section has been emp- tied into the rest of the volume; communication, topic and comment, metaphor and shared knowledge are in sections other than Pragmatics. Cross-referencing between them is poor. The entry on relevance seems to have been culled from other people™s critical reviews of the Sperber and Wilson book. The notion of relevance is one that has interested many people at different times and is an important concept in pragmatics. Other ways of cashing relevance out and the relation between this concept and coherence could have been explored. If the entry is to be just about relevance theory, then that is what it should have been called, and some of the significant literature in the relevance-theoretic framework dealing with a whole variety of aspects of utter- ance interpretation should have been considered. The fact that entries date from more than ten years ago. even though they have been updated. means that a lot of interesting work has been left out. This is particu- larly true in the case of pragmatics, where developments in research on psychology have turned up exciting new results that relate to issues found in the encyclopaedia. There is nothing on the interesting work on theory of mind and communication, for example, although on the evidence of current research these two abilities are closely related. The datedness of the volume decreases the relevance that it could have had to the other disciplines at which it was presumably directed. Nevertheless, despite some disappointing gaps. the encyclopaedia as a whole does act as a helpful guide through sometimes unfamiliar territory, and the standard of entry is uniformly high, apart from those few already noted exceptions. Linguists generally have encyclopedias as collections of knowledge, in the sense of hard data. to dip into; that is not the kind of thing philosophy deals in, so this vol- ume is not an encyclopaedia in an expected way. Nor is it a reader, as in a collection of classic papers, nor a handbook as in a collection of contemporary papers. It might best be described as a set of commissioned (short) papers on classic topics. As such it can be seen how it could be successful as a resource for the revision of concepts taught in a sister discipline but imperfectly recalled, although it is not so clear how easy it would be to follow for someone completely unfamiliar with the topics. Rarely would a professional find anything new in entries in their own discipline, although entries in related disciplines are certainly of interest. The book could well be useful for psychologists, or biologists who are feeling interdisciplinary. which underlines the lack coverage pertinent to research in psychology or evolutionary studies: other disciplines need to be able to relate the issues readily to their field of expertise. To be fair, the queries raised about the structure of the encyclopedia are not spe- cific to this volume, but are wider considerations facing hard copy encyclopedias in general. Arguably, these kind of materials are best served by web-based publication with constant update and review. Whether the volume is supposed to be for linguists who want to know about phi- losophy. or philosophers who want to know about linguistics might be the wrong way to think about it; topics, concepts and questions about ‚language™ or ‚meaning™ in some or other sense have different approaches and it is worth being aware of the different perspectives and useful to have them collected together (particularly as lin- guists and philosophers of language often live pretty segregated lives). 