ELSEVIER Lingua 110(2000)949-956 www.el\evier.nl/locatellIngu;t Book review Klaus von Heusinger and Urs Egli (eds.), Reference und anaphoric relufions, (Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy, Volume 72). Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2000. ISBN o-7923-6070-2 (hb). xi + 347 p. Reviewed by Ahti Pietarinen, School of Cognitive and Computing Sciences, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton BNl 9QH, UK. E-mail: ahtivp@cogs.susx.ac.uk What would an adequate theory of anaphora and (co)reference look like? An answer has to address a large number of problematic questions, while being able to analyse novel data that linguists have not been slow to uncover. Such a unifying theory not in sight, the collection Reference and anuphor-ic I-e/u- tions has its roots where syntactic theories of anaphora leaves us off, approaching the interpretation of noun phrases, anaphoric pronouns, and definites and indefinites from the viewpoints of discourse representation theory, file change semantics, dynamic logic, and choice function theories, with reference to the historical aspects of anaphora, the notion of quantification and its scope, and the theories of linguistic rep- resentation, context and meaning. While many of the issues remain controversial, some convergence or at least mutual assistance has been achieved between the rival accounts in this book, and many papers devote space in the investigation of the poten- tials of the interplay and the nature of ideas shared between the differing theories. Nothing is entirely new. Urs Egli shows in the opening paper that already the Stoics recognized the substitution failure of pronouns, (e.g. that substituting some- body for he fails in ‚If somebody is in Athens, it is not the case that he is in Rhodes™), dividing pronouns into deictic and anaphoric ones. Such considerations of anaphora led the Stoics to develop systems to which elements of (polyadic) predicate logic and even dynamic logic where not completely alien, thus clearly going beyond Aristotelian syllogistics in their expressive power. Another interesting historical fact is that in medieval time, a version of an ‚E-type™ approach was discussed in the works of the French philosopher Buridan and others. as Reinhard Hiilsen argues in his paper on medieval logicians™ work on anaphoric pronouns. An exposition of the modem history of dynamic approaches to meaning it described in Jeroen Groenendijk and Martin Stokhof™s essay on the place of dynamic semantics in philosophy and linguistics, where they argue for the convenience of con- textual approaches to anaphora and quantification provided by dynamic semantics. 037%2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-384l(OO)OOOl9-X 950 Book reviews I Linguu 110 (2000) 949-956 How do the different theories advocated in this book handle simple anaphoric sen- tences? In dynamic interpretation, variables can be ‚semantically™ bound outside the ‚syntactic™ scope of quantifiers, essentially by means of the use of the same variable symbol and special interpretation rules. Since dynamic semantics attempts to achieve this in a compositional way, it differs from the standard predicate calculus in that scope and binding conventions are different. Dynamic semantics was meant to be an adjuvant treatment for the problems rais- ing their heads in discourse representation theories of anaphora, but it has turned out that merely resorting to dynamics does not solve all the problems related to anaphora. Paucis verhis, the more complex the sentence is the more difficult it is to handle it by means of dynamic resources alone. An example can be given by means of the sentence ‚If every farmer buys a donkey, someone will beat it before they are at home™ (cf. Hintikka, 1997). A further but even deeper problem is the question of how the impossibility of coreference is explained in dynamic semantics in a non-trivial way, viz. why is it that universal sentences and negated existential sentences do not ‚pass on bindings™ to make coreferential links possible? The source of dynamism in dynamic semantics lies in the assignments and their updat- ing, which may be too narrow a source to explain the real dynamism of informa- tion, which consists of the attempted verification processes of the totality of text involved in the interpretation rather than any special value or special sets of values received by individual variables in the relevant assignment. Such an ‚assignment- change™ taken to account for the notion of context change is a rather weak form of dynamism when it comes to the actual verification processes of complex anaphoric sentences, let alone being able to manipulate the dynamics of information when the content of the discourse itself is attempted to be evaluated with respect to classically truth-conditionally identical sentences. Groenendijk and Stokhof acknowledge the need for a more drastic remedy for some of the weaknesses of dynamic semantics, and an attempt is made to push semantics closer to discourse representation theories, by putting forward an idea of extending dynamic theories with an incremental stock of discourse referents much like in the discourse representation theories. This extension seems to be a step in the right direction, rectifying the original distortion of dynamic theories in their location of the dynamism in the wrong place; the incremental set of entities together with information states introduced at some earlier stages in discourse now provides a sup- ply of legitimate values for pronouns and noun phrases, contextually restricting the total domain of discourse. But the motivational problem recurs: it still needs to be asked how these ‚context sets™ come about? What is it that determines their content? Groenendijk and Stokhof suggest the notions of support of a sentence by an infor- mation state, and consistency of a sentence with speaker™s information state, but they have little explanatory force to offer at this point. The Karttunen-Heim-Kamp discourse representation theory is thus lurking behind dynamic semantics, and it indeed is one of the early methods developed to deal with anaphora. Discourse representation theory does not receive any independent treat- ment in this volume, however, while elements of it are incorporated into the exten- sions of dynamic semantics, a view advocated by various papers in this book. Book re\ieM™ I Lingua 110 (2000) 949-9-X 951 Do choice functions also provide a similar useful tool for extending other seman- tic theories, or would the approach extend to an independent theory worth develop- ing on its own? Essentially, choice functions have been used to interpret indefinites in situ. In the linguistic context with indefinites, choice functions are functions map- ping non-empty sets of individuals to individuals. Thus the logical subject of indefi- nites is not just an individual variable, but also a function. Whether an indefinite invariably is a function seems to be a matter of debate: linguistic theories with choice functions usually either assume so, or leave reading of a sentence ambiguous. There are essentially two roles choice functions play in the interpretation of indef- inites. They are used in receiving an existential quantification in the logical repre- sentation of the sentence, and in getting more freedom for the possible scoping rela- tions of expressions in addition to just the somewhat worn-out notions of an expression having ‚wide scope™ or ‚narrow scope™ with respect to other expressions. Argued already in Fodor and Sag (1982), indefinites can sometimes be taken to behave differently from other NPs in taking a position not shared by other NPs. In (l), for example, the reading that is available for the indefinite some says that there is a woman x I know such that ifs comes to the party John will be glad. In (2), how- ever, the reading that for every woman x I know, if Y comes to the party John will be glad is not the intended one. Fodor and Sag argue that there is a difference in these readings which is not brought out by writing them out as having a similar form where both the indefinite some and the universal NP ever:): scope over the condi- tional. (1) If some woman I know comes to the party John will be glad. (2) If every woman I know comes to the party John will be glad. A tool linguists have now discovered is that this scoping difference can be explained in terms of choice functions. Choice functions have also proved to be use- ful for the semantics w/z-phrases, constituting an analysis which does not turn on approaches based on the syntactic rules of quantifier raising or logical form move- ment. However, one of the first questions concerning the legitimate linguistic use of choice functions should ask how these choice functions really spring up in the first place, and on what assumptions their existence is being based. If a pronoun expres- sion such as his OY her mother in ‚Everyone admires his or her mother™ introduces a function rather than an individual, how are we to explain this fact, and how does the function manage to pick the right kind of individuals? Such an explanation in ahsen- tia in the papers discussing choice functions, one could envisage a usefulness of game-theoretic semantics (see Hintikka and Sandu, 1997: Sandu, 1997; Pietarinen and Sandu, 2000), which would essentially explain the case by saying that choice functions are strategies of players of the semantic game, that is, they provide strate- gic resources and tools for players who aim to verify or falsify sentences. If the sen- tence is to be come out as true, these functions can express winning strategies for the verifying player, and so true formulas can guarantee the existence of such winning strategies (similarly for the falsity and winning strategies for the falsifying players). But such choice functions do not come about by looking at those parts of the 952 Book wview I Linguu II0 (2000) 949-956 discourse including pronoun expressions only. For nothing in a function such as his or her mother can guarantee, when interpreted as a choice function, that it would take some individuals as its arguments and then assign these individuals a suitable individual to which this phrase is supposed to refer or denote. This is because the pronoun has to be accompanied with a quantificational phrase it varies with, and this quantified expression introduces a choice by a player to which another player has to respond by using a certain strategy (i.e. a choice function). Consequently, only from this interactive setting one can infer the role of choice functions in interpreting indef- inites. Such fundamental considerations are helpful in illuminating the position shared by many semantic theories that utilise one mechanism of choice functions or another. For example Chierchia (1995) uses choice functions without any real explanatory remarks about their nature or motivation, and similar things can be said of the works Reinhart, 1997 and Winter, 1997, as well as the contributions of Yoad Winter, Amim von Stechow, and Klaus von Heusinger in this book. While choice functions can naturally be seen to arise as players™ strategies in a semantic game, these contributions acquiesce in the admittedly carefully developed technical side of this interesting idea, without fathoming the foundations in a sufficient depth. But wider views urge one to attempt to answer the question of whether there are ways of deriving choice functions from some general properties of natural language. If we view natural language as a relevant form of ‚language game™, it becomes a strategy- driven process between participants, involving elements which in the formal theory of language have to be codified as strategies. Indeftnites provide a class of elements naturally arising as dependent interactive functions, and the ‚choice™ essentially becomes a player™s verifying of falsifying activity in a game. In addition, much like in game theory in general, there is no reason to assume that these strategies have to be perfect information strategies, i.e. linguistically they do not have to be choices that are dependent on all previous strings of determiners within a sentence or discourse. Thus choice functions become a particular element of language-game rather than any self-standing semantic theory. Further, it should come as no surprise that the motivation for introducing choice functions originates from examples that also illus- trate the phenomenon of informational independence, yet another linguistic episode whose essence can be captured by means of game-theoretic semantics (see Pietari- nen, 2000b). The need for the in situ interpretation of indefinites can be explicated in alternative and more general terms as one where an indefinite has a logical prior- ity over other determiners occurring in higher clauses although its syntactic position may not differ from a ‚narrow scope™ one. Similar things can happen for connec- tives, so in this light, choice function theories could be extended to cover proposi- tional constants as well. In general, choice functions should be placed among those elements that can be put into the discourse representation structures or similar choice or context sets used in dynamic logic, but then such sets clearly have to contain objects that receive semantic values in addition to purely syntactic particles. The notion of scope receives a separate treatment in three papers. Donka Farkas™ contribution portrays a non-structural theory of (binding) scope where an expression is said to be in the scope of another expression iff the semantic content of the latter Book r-e+w ILinguu 110 (2000) 949-956 9.53 affects the former. Farkas™ theory uses Kaplan-style indices of evaluation for freely available semantic scoping relations, dispensing with movement theories and syntactic constraints. One could perhaps raise a question of whether we need a notion of scope at all, given that it is assumed to be a thoroughly non-structural notion. For does not the transmission of the semantic content in sentences then become explained by means other than scope, and ambiguous readings derived from the various priority relations of the semantic content established by the interpretational processes? In Scope ambiguities with negatilv quant$ers, Henriette de Swart argues that a lexical decomposition is not desirable and in fact incorrect in deriving split readings of certain German or Dutch sentences with intervening universal quantifiers or modal operators in a determiner phrase between its negation part and the existential part. Here the example in English: (3) A man is not allowed to seek a unicorn. This reading presumably is distinct from the following two: (4) There is no unicorn such that a man is allowed to seek it. (de re reading) (5) What a man is allowed to do is to seek no unicorn. (de ditto reading) A lexical decomposition splits, say, the German morpheme kein into a negation operator and an indefinite determiner. It should be noted that it seems we should fur- ther assume that the decomposition preserves the ordering of these components, or else one gets incorrect predictions. De Swart nonetheless takes this empirical inade- quacy to count as an argument against decomposition, but one has to keep in mind that de Swart nowhere makes the preservative assumption. The generalisation given in the paper applies this analysis to downward entailing quantifiers together with a maximality condition, deriving a split reading ‚Tom does not need more than two blankets™ from ‚Tom needs at most two blankets™. for instance. While it seems that these sentences really have different presuppositions, the number of blankets being ‚closer to two™ in the former than the latter, the theory is valuable for example in throwing new light to the behaviour of negation in natural language. Reinhard Muskens™ paper on underspecified semantics investigates a possibility of having a single underspecified structure and a representation for numerous scope readings of an ambiguous sentence, attempting to specify the structure by some addi- tional available information thereafter. This theory is developed within classical pred- icate logic, the idea being that the relation between an underspecified representation and its full specification is similar to the relation between a theory and its models. A phenomenon known as a definiteness effect is discussed in Elena Paducheva™s essay, with special reference to Russian. She investigates which combination princi- ples are at work in English there-sentences and in Russian counterparts. One require- ment is that the subject be properly denoting determiner rather than a referential or quantificational one in order for there-construction to be licensed. An interesting somewhat isolated semantic observation is put forward in Stephen Neale™s paper, showing that there are three inconsistent assumption that nonetheless 954 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 949-956 are quite commonly accepted among linguists: (i) a sentence of the form the As are Bs is true iff every A is B and there is more than one A, (ii) negative polarity items can occur only in downward entailing environments, and (iii) plural descriptions may contain negative polarity items. Given that all these are more or less commonly accepted, a discrepancy remains to be explained alway. Neale discusses possible solutions but does not suggest any definite answers. I would give up the assumption (ii), for consider the sentence (6) which has a negative polarity item ever even in the environment which is not downward entailing: (6) John is the tallest man to ever win the championship. This sentence seems perfectly fine although superlatives may fail to be downward entailing. Anaphoric reference in intensional contexts is an interesting issue taken up in two papers. Both of them deal with the problem introduced by Peter Geach in the sixties by means of Hob-Nob sentences: (7) Hob thinks that a witch has blighted Bob™s mare and Nob thinks that she (the same witch) has killed Cob™s sow. This sentence illustrates the problem known as intentional identity, which says that there can be an anaphoric link between an indefinite term and a pronoun across a sentential boundary and across propositional attitude contexts, even if the existence of individual for the indefinite is not presupposed. These sentences have proved very elusive, and the first of the papers, Robert van Rooy™s Anuphoric relations across attitude contexts aims to develop a theory incorporating pragmatic aspects of inten- tional identities, and relating belief objects introduced by asserting Hob-Nob sen- tences to discourse objects in cross-speaker anaphora in general. Van Rooy™s paper argues that the pragmatic theories involve the notion of common ground, which means that the belief objects of different agents can be counterparts if ‚two agents have communicated with each other about a certain object, and for that reason parts of what they believe have a common ground™ (p. 167). This common ground, shared because of communication, creates a distributed belief object for Hob and for Nob. As far as Hob-Nob sentences are concerned, however, I think it should be empha- sised that there seems to be no such communication involved in the original under- standing of these sentences. If communicative systems are created in a background narrative or even in the sentence itself, we do not seem to be dealing with the origi- nal puzzle of intentional identity alone, but with one that lets many pragmatic and extra-logical principles and assumptions in, going beyond the original Geach™s pre- ferred reading and his problem of intentional identity. In Hartley Slater™s essay The grammar of the attitudes the problem is approached by arguing that a purely syntactic analysis of (7) is feasible and sufficient by means of a Hilbertian epsilon term associated with the anaphoric pronoun variable, identi- fying the relevant term in the first conjunction of the sentence, repeating it later on in the sentence. Book rvlYew I Linpu 110 (2000) 949-956 9.55 One is tempted to comment both proposals as follows. Whereas the former tries to make the problem of intentional identity more complicated than it, is probably by introducing extra-logical pragmatic elements into the semantics, the latter seems to explain the problem by an oversimplification and by completely ignoring the impor- tance of the model-theoretic aspects needed in the explanation. It is useful to refer to King (1993), which also deals with the questions raised by these papers by means of context-dependent quantification, with interesting similarities but also certain differ- ences (cf. Pietarinen, 2000a). The remaining papers deal with what editors have set under the loose terms of ‚representation and interpretation™. In Referencr and inference: The case of anaphora, Jaroslav Peregrin comments on many important issues in the foundations of contemporary semantic theories, arguing that the downright explanation of the role and nature of discourse objects, information states or choice functions as men- tal entities does not make their role or nature any clearer, because whatever is meant by mental objects is likely to be at least as hard a task as when the nature of onto- logically more prominent elements are attempted to be clarified. What else can be said of the role of discourse referents and their ilk in interpreta- tion? Paul Dekker addresses this question, distinguishing three different representa- tional levels of linguistic meaning. According to Dekker, any representational theory has to have at least some reference to linguistic facts, where linguistic facts include things like ‚all aspects of (linguistic) information exchange™ (p. 298). Further, accord- ing to Dekker non-representational theories have domains that are ‚independently specified™ and ‚independently motivated™ (p. 298). Since there are many variants of single semantic theories, only the original and most puristic forms of dynamic semantics and discourse representation theories can be outright categorised according to this specification, but they both count as representational anyway. One should note that in the light of the previous discussion about choice function theories, they can count as non-representational as soon as they receive an adequate independent moti- vation, for example in terms of strategies. It is also possible to escape various repre- sentational categorisations that Dekker advocates by means of reasonably motivated possible worlds semantics, for example, especially by means of those with identify- ing (conceptual) semantics for individuals instead of just rigidly referential ones. For the interest of wider perspectives this book invites everyone to consider, let us finally say a word on how the alternative framework of game-theoretic semantics we have already briefly mentioned would fare in the environment of this book. which indeed contains a diversity of semantic theories, problems and empirical issues. Now it is interesting to note that game-theoretic semantics (i) can account for anaphora in extensional and in intensional contexts, (ii) provides a theoretic backing for the notion of choice functions, (iii) has a similar contextual tool as the discourse repre- sentation structures in discourse-oriented theories in terms of choice sets, (iv) already involves much of the dynamics in the interpretation of sentences, (v) deliv- ers a theory of ‚scope™ by assigning game-theoretic evaluation rules directly on Eng- lish expressions in a prioritised order, and (vi) counts as non-representational in that the processes of verification and falsification and the notion of strategies receive linguistically unaided and autonomous theoretic motivation. 956 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 949-956 This is a well-balanced book and yet wide in coverage. At least one thing is cer- tain: a convergence of various theories will continue in the future, merging them and taking best of all worlds. This book is likely to remain the dynamogenesis for such projects for a long time. The following misprints were noted: (p. 7, line 9) ‚syntacticians™ for ‚syntaciti- cians™; (p. 7, line -7) ‚decreasing™ for ‚descreasing™; (p. 21, line -4) ‚Fourth™ for ‚Forth™; (p. 23, line 1) ‚and™ for ‚an™; (p. 24, line -17) ‚tukasiewicz™ for ‚Lukasiewicz™; (p. 27, line 12) ‚+*), for ‚T(p)*‚; (p. 29, line -3) ‚Uber™ for ‚gber™; (p. 145, line -5) ‚extensions™ for ‚extentions™; (p. 206, line -4) ‚guarantee™ for ‚garantee™; (p. 208, line 6) ‚philosopher™ for ‚philospher™; (p. 208, line 17) delete ‚the™; (p. 221, line -3) ‚independently™ for ‚independly™; (p. 226, line 18) ‚always™ for ‚allways™; (p. 250, line -15) ‚is™ for ‚in™; (p. 251, line -2) ‚>I™ for ‚I)‚; (p. 295, line 9) ‚February™ for ‚february™; (p. 316, line 9): delete ‚are™. References Chierchia, G., 1995. Questions with quantifiers. Natural Language Semantics I, 181-234. Fodor, J. and I. Sag, 1982. Referential and quantificational indefinites. Linguistics and Philosophy 5, 355-398. Hintikka, J., 1997. No scope for scope? Linguistics and Philosophy 20, 515-544. Hintikka, J. and G. Sandu, 1997. Game-theoretical semantics. In: J. van Benthem and A. ter Meulen (eds.), Handbook of Logic and Language, 3611110. Amsterdam: Elsevier. King, J.C., 1993. Intentional identity generalized. Journal of Philosophical Logic 22, 61-93. Pietarinen, A., 2000a. Intentional identity revisited. Preprint. Pietarinen, A., 2000b. Informational independence in natural language. To appear in Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic. Pietarinen, A. and G. Sandu, 2000. Games in philosophical logic. Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic 4, 143-173. Reinhart, T., 1997. Quantifier scope: How labour is divided between QR and choice functions. Linguis- tics and Philosophy 20, 335-397. Sandu, G., 1997. On the theory of anaphora: Dynamic predicate logic vs. game-theoretical semantics. Linguistics and Philosophy 20, 147-174. Winter, Y., 1997. Choice functions and the scopal semantics of indefinites. Linguistics and Philosophy 20. 3999467. 