ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 137-139 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Book review Martin Haspelmath, Indefinite pronouns. Oxford Studies in Typology and Lin- guistic Theory. Oxford: Clarendon, 1997. 364 p. Reviewed by Peter Mtihlhlusler, Department of Linguistics, University of Ade- laide SA 5005, Australia. Haspelmath™s study of indefinite pronouns is best understood as a modified Greenbergian survey, concerned with universal, mainly morphosyntactic aspects, of human languages. Typical of this approach is a consideration of a large number of languages (four hundred in this study), the concentration on small grammatical units (only minimal attention is paid to units larger than the sentence) and the associated belief that their semantic properties can be ascertained with little or no reference to contextual and pragmatic factors. The limitations of the approach taken here are well known: typological studies rely on the availability of criteria for determining samenesses across languages - in this case for what counts as indefinite pronoun and what doesn™t. Haspelmath (p. 9ff.) argues that a combination of formal and functional criteria are needed to define the units used in his comparative study - they have to be pro-nouns or pro-forms and their main function is to express indefinite reference. By these criteria English one and German man should have been included (and perhaps subclassified as generic pronouns) but they are in fact excluded because ‚generic pronouns have very differ- ent properties from words like ‚someone™ ‚. What is meant by ‚having very different properties™ is not spelt out and I fail to see how the differences are greater than say between who and no one. In fact, there are many contexts in which one and someone are almost interchangeable. (1) a. one has to do something about this mess b. someone has to do something about this mess Equally excluded is the pronoun they which frequently is called an indefinite or unspecified pronoun. There are a number of possible reasons for its exclusion which are given by Wales (1996: 46). The writers of the numerous grammars that Haspelmath uses as his data base can- not be relied on applying the same or even similar criteria for their characterization of indefinite pronouns. It is not clear to me why Dutch wie dan ook, ‚whoever™ is 0024-3841/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(99)00024-8 138 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 137-139 included in his database and German wer (such) immer is excluded and that for Eng- lish we find a cryptic remark (p. 248): ‚The indefinite ever form is a series of its own™. The problem what to include and what to exclude is compounded by the unrelia- bility of the sources even when checked by native speakers. What is presented in the appendix is not necessarily comparable and the generalizations based on it must remain tentative. Let me comment on the claim (p. 1) that ‚the book gives a comprehensive view of the main theoretical debate concerning the semantic and syntactic properties of indefinite pronouns™. This of course means that other major debates about indefinite pronouns such as their role in politeness (Brown and Levinson, 1987: 197), dis- course pragmatics (Wales, 1996: 45ff., 78ff., 8Off., 126ff. etc.) or polyfunctionality (Mtihlhausler and Harre, 1991) are given little consideration. But even at the seman- tic/syntactic level ‚main™ is an unnecessarily restricted label excluding for instance considerable work on pronominal grammar written within the systemic functional approach. Creolists, ever since Bickerton (1981) postulated certain properties of question pronouns as biologically conditioned properties of Creoles, have carried out considerable research which typologists could have profited from. I do not wish to blame Haspelmath for not having considered all relevant research but I do find his use of ‚main™ highly problematic if not imperialist. The volume is divided into chapters concerned with theoretical issues (1, 3, 4, 5) and others that are more data based (3, 6, 7, 8 and of course the appendices) but Haspelmath generally succeeds in making good use of the data in theoretical argu- mentations. The greatest use of typological studies is that of linguistic reconstruc- tion: the work of a typologist is sometimes compared to someone reconstructing a dinosaur on the basis of a few bones: such reconstruction is possible because of complex implicational relationships. The thinness of a bone can indicate whether the dinosaur is of the flying type or not; the absence of a head does not lead reconstruc- tionists to the conclusion that there must have been headless dinosaurs. Body size usually is sufficient to reconstruct an approximate head. In other words there are constraints and possible packages of typological features. The interest of a grammatical feature is greatest where it implies the maximum number of other features: regrettably indefinite pronouns don™t do much work. We are informed (p. 238) that they do not imply properties of other features and their predictive power is hence diminished. The volume provides comparative description rather than typological tools for reconstruction work. Haspelmath makes a number of useful suggestions, however, as to how future research might increase the relevance of indefinite pronouns to typological linguistics. The volume is well presented and edited and contains an extensive bibliography on the topic of indefinite pronouns in what Haspelmath regards the mainstream of linguistics. It will appeal to specialists rather than to people with an only generalist interest in linguistics. Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 137-130 139 References Bickerton, Derek, 198 1, Roots of language, Ann Arbor, Karoma. Brown, Penelope and Stephen Levinson, 1987. Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cam- bridge: Cambridge University Press. Mtihlhlusler, Peter and Rom Harm, 1991. Pronouns and people. Oxford: Blackwell. Wales, Katie, 1996. Personal Pronouns in Present-day English, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 