ELSEVIER Lingua I 10 (2000) 99-l 29 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua On system-driven sound change : Accent shift in Markina Basque* JosC Ignacio Hualde* Department of Spanish and Portuguese University of Illinois, 707 South Ma1heM.s A1.e.. 4080 Foreign L,qs. Bldg., Urhuna, IL 61801, USA Received 14 September 1998; revised version 27 May 1999 Abstract Regular sound change has been seen as primarily involving the phonologization of fast speech reductions (Browman and Goldstein, 1991; Mowrey and Pagliuca, 1995; Bybee, 1997) or being otherwise motivated by phonetic tendencies (Donegan, 1993). In this paper I argue that systemically-based sound changes lacking phonetic motivation need to be given greater attention as they offer crucial evidence for the organization of the mental lexicon. One area where system-based changes are particularly prominent and clear is in the diachronic restructuring of accentual systems. Here I examine a situation in western Basque where the acquisition of a phonetically-based sound change has triggered the application of other ‚com- pensatory™ system-driven changes, giving rise to an extensive restructuration of the accentual system. 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 1. Introduction According to a view of sound change which, in principle, seems reasonable, sound change is for the most part articulatory reduction and results from the phonol- ogization of fast speech phenomena (Browman and Goldstein, 1991; Mowrey and Pagliuca, 1995; Byhee, 1997). This hypothesis, although parsimonious and compat- ible with what we know about perhaps the majority of phenomena of internal sound change, leaves certain developments unexplained. In particular no explanation is given for systemic phenomena such as lenition chains and vowel shifts; that is, those For comments, I am grateful to Jennifer Cole, Gorka Elordieta, Mane1 Perez-Saldanya, Tomas Riad, Daniel Silverman and an anonymous reviewer for this journal. * E-mail: j-hualde@staff.uiuc.edu 0024-3841/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(99)00033-9 100 JJ. Hualde I Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 cases where the fact that a segment or set of segments changed in a certain direction appears to have triggered a concomitant change in other sets of segments, as when all intervocalic obstruents weaken ‚one degree™ or all long vowels rise ‚one step™. In such chains, although the initial step may be phonetically motivated, the rest of the changes would rather appear to be systemically or phonologically motivated, with the result that merger between phonemes is avoided and, in some sense, the ‚same™ previously existent contrast is preserved after the change (cf. Martinet, 1955). Admittedly, in some of the chain phenomena studied by Martinet and others, which took place long ago and for which the exact chronology is unknown, we may be dealing with a number of independent changes instead of with an overall restruc- turing of the system. For instance, the intervocalic stop weakening chain observed in the history of Spanish, where voiceless geminate stops degeminate, single voiceless stops voice (and spirantize) and single voiced stops delete (e.g. SCLCCU > saco, lam > lago, ego > *eo > yo) may have consisted of several unrelated processes taking place at different historical times. Nevertheless, Labov™s (1994) work on vowel shifts lends credence to the view that chain-like systemic sound changes are a fact of linguistic evolution. Consider also the diachronic denasalization of vowels in French. In most lan- guages, vowels are somewhat nasalized preceding nasal consonants. In French, how- ever, words like bonne, saine, fine, etc. contain completely oral vowels (cf. Cohn, 1993). Historically, in French too vowels underwent nasalization preceding nasal consonants, but these vowels were subsequently denasalized when the nasal conso- nant was on the onset of a following syllable, as in bonne, saine,fine (but not when vowel and consonant were tautosyllabic, as in bon, sain, fin, cf. Harris, 1988). It is hard to imagine a phonetic reason for this denasalization. Rather, it appears that the motivating factor for this change was the phonologization of the contrast between nasal and oral vowels. That is, this was a systemically-motivated sound change (see Hayes (1996) on phonologization of phonetic effects, and Silverman (1997, 1998) on systemic forces, for recent views). It appears that systemic factors may play an important role in the evolution of prosodic systems as well. In the western Basque area we find a group of pitch-accent systems with widely divergent accentual patterns of rules, even though they are all obviously quite closely related from a historical point of view. In this paper, we will consider the details of the evolution in a variety with a particularly complex accen- tual system, that of Markina. I will argue that in addition to phonetic forces, other important factors in guiding the evolution of the accentual system have been general principles of pattern consistency and regularity in the expression of contrasts. 2. The western Basque pitch-accent system In part of the Bizkaian or Western Basque area we find a type of prosodic system which is very much unlike any other accentual system found in Europe. As already mentioned, there are some non-trivial differences within this area. Their origin is precisely the focus of this paper. There are reasons to believe that the most conserv- J.I. Hualde I Lingua II0 (2000) 69-129 101 ative member of this family of pitch-accent systems is the one I will dub the Gernika type (cf. Hualde, 1993, 1995). We will consider the evidence for this stand at the end of this section. The Gernika accentual system is employed, with only minor variation in a large area extending from Getxo (near Bilbao) to Bermeo, Gemika and Arratzu (in central Bizkaia). Let us thus consider first the Gemika accentual type. In the Gemika accentual sys- tem, in the unmarked case, an utterance consisting of a single phonological phrase is characterized by a high tone plateau extending from the second syllable to the last syllable. The last syllable bears a falling contour and is felt by speakers as accentu- ally prominent: ™ (1) Gernika: Unaccented phrases2 lal gun6 ‚the friend™ kl gune da ‚(it) is the friend™ ~1 re lagune da ‚(it) is our friend™ ~1 re lagune dadr ‚our friend is coming™ gu_l re lagun aundiie ~1 re lagun aundiie da ‚our great friend™ ‚(it) is our great friend™ El re txistulari ona ‚our good flutist™ gu_l re txistulari ona da gu_l re lagunen erriie da ‚(it) is our good flutist™ ‚(it) is the town of our friend™ Some words, however, are lexically accented on a given syllable and present a sharp drop in pitch on the posttonic. All words bearing certain inflectional suffixes, including all plural suffixes, are accented. In the examples in (2), lagtinek ‚the friends™ is accented because it bears a plural suffix. In addition a relatively small group of stems bear a lexical accent and are accented on the same syllable in all inflected forms, these include libru ‚book™, gernikar ‚Gemikan™ and leku ‚place™ in the examples : ™ The copula da ‚is™ and other inflected verbs such as dater .is coming™ are included in the same prosodic phrase as the noun phrase to their left. ™ Basque orthography: x 10, fx [to, tz [ts], II [cl. I1 [K]. Vowel sequences of rising sonority such as ue are heterosyllabic [u.e], whereas sequences of falling sonority like PU are diphthongs, [ew]. Abbrevia- tions: ABS = absolutive, ABL = ablative, ALL = allative, BEN = benefactive, COM = comitative, DAT = dative, ERG = ergative, GEN = genitive, GEN-L = genitive locative, sg = singular, pl = plural. 102 J.1. Hualde i Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 (2) Gernika: Phrases containing lexically accented words hl gd I& ‚the friends™ gll_l re lag6 I& ‚our friends™ al re lagti I nek dires ‚(they) are our friends™ gu_l re li I bru aun I diie da ‚(it) is our great book™ gt~l re gemi I kar o La ‚our good Gemikan™ ml re lag6 I nen e I rriie da ‚(it) is the town of our friends™ cl re lag6 lml 16 I&i% ‚(it) is the place of our friends™ The contrast between lexically accented and unaccented words can be observed in the FO tracings in Appendix A. In this prosodic system there is thus a fundamental distinction between lexically accented and unaccented words. Accented words are words bearing certain inflec- tional endings (accented suffixes), including all plural forms, and items with fixed accent on a given syllable of the stem across all inflectional forms (accented stems), e.g. le™ku ‚place™, libru ‚book™, gernikar ‚Gemikan™, biste ‚other™, amcima ‚grand- mother™, kcinpotar ‚outsider™, etc. In (3) partial inflectional paradigms are offered for the unaccented stems lagun ‚friend™ and buru ‚head™. As can be seen, all plural forms are accented and so are the comitative and ablative singular. In all plural forms the accent falls on the final syl- lable of the stem; that is, the corresponding inflectional suffixes are preaccenting (more complete paradigms are given in Appendix B). Throughout the plural para- digm the accent thus falls on the same syllable as in the absolutive, which is the most basic and most frequent form. In the ablative singular too the accent falls on the last syllable of the stem. Preaccentuation is also found in the comitative singular, the dif- ference being that the comitative suffix -gas is added to the absolutive singular, and not directly to the base (which, as we will see, explains its anomalous accentuation): (3) Gernika: ABS DAT BEN 
COM ABS DAT BEN Singular vs. plural, general pattern - lagun ‚jriend™, buru ‚head™ Singular Plural lagune lagdnek laguneri laguneri lagunentzat lagunentzat lagunegas lagunekin, lagunekas burue buniek burueri bunieri buruentzat bunientzat JJ. Hualde I Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 103 COM ALL ABL buruCgas burure buriitik burtiekin, burtiekas bunietara bunietatik In exceptional items, on the other hand, there is fixed accent on a nonfinal sylla- ble of the stem in all forms of the inflectional paradigm. This causes neutralization between many singular and plural forms. The items lt4ku ‚place™ and he™s& ‚other™ are accented stems : (4) Gernika: Accented stems - leku ‚place™, beste ‚other™ Singular Plural ABS lekue lekuek DAT lekueri lekueri BEN lekuentzat lekuentzat ALL lekure lekuetara ABL lekutik lekuetatik ABS DAT BEN COM ALL ABL b&tie bestieri b&tientzat bestiegas bestera bestetik bestiek bestieri bestientzat bestiekin, bestiekas bestietara bestietatik In (5) lexically accented words are further illustrated. As shown, the lexical accent may fall on any nonfinal syllable of the stem: (5) Gemika: Exceptional words (accented-stem words) Singular Plural ABS kanpotarra kanpotarrak ERG kanpotarrak kanpotarrak DAT kanpotarrari kanpotarrari ABS gemikatra gemikarrak ABS ikaratiie ikaratiiek ABS lfbrue lfbruek ‚outsider™ ‚Gemikan™ ‚shy™ ‚book™ We have noted that when the stem is accented any potential accentual distinctions introduced by suffixes are neutralized. There is thus a ‚first accent wins™ rule. One can see the operation of the same rule in words bearing several suffixes attached to an unaccented stem. In (6a) both suffixes are unaccented and the word receives only phrase-final accent. The word in (6b) contains an unaccented genitive singular suffix followed by an accented (preaccenting) dative plural, and the accent of the dative plural surfaces on the preceding syllable. In (6~) it is the first of the two suffixes 104 J.I. Hualde I Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 which is lexically accented and an accent surfaces on the final syllable of the stem. Finally, the crucial case in (6d) where both suffixes are lexically accented (both of them are plural) and we see that it is the first one of the two that surfaces. (6) Gernika: First accent rule a. GENsg+DATsg lagun-en-ari ‚to the one of the friend™ b. GENsg+DATpl lagun-en-ari ‚to the ones of the friend™ c. GENpl+DATsg lagtin-en-ari ‚to the one of the friends™ d. GENpl+DATpl lagun-en-ari ‚to the ones of the friends™ If instead of an unnaccented stem such as lagun, we choose an accented stem such as le™ku, all four suffix combinations in (6) produce the same result: Mkuenari ‚to the one/-s of the place/-s™. This accentual system can thus be summarized as follows: (7) Gernika: Accentual system - There is a lexical distinction between accented and unaccented words. - In phrases consisting only of unaccented words, prominence is assigned to the phrase-final syllable.3 - Accented words have fixed accent on a given syllable. - In polymorphemic words containing more than one accentually marked mor- pheme, the first accented morpheme determines the position of the surface accent. As indicated, most words are unaccented, receiving only phrase-final accent. As argued in Hualde (1993) it is possible to reconstruct a historical stage where all words were unaccented. The phenomenon of preaccentuation with suffixes such as the plural ones can be seen as having its source in a boundary accent in clitic groups. In fact, even in the present-day language a number of clitics fall outside of the accen- tual unit, causing preaccentuation; e.g. : lagune™ ‚the friend™, lagune™ be ‚the friend too™ (not *lagune be™). This phenomenon is also not unlike what we find in Classical Latin, e.g. lfmina but liinincique. Regarding singular and plural suffixes, there is independent evidence for assuming that singular determiners became suffixes before plural ones did (Michelena, 1981). We may envision a stage where forms like lagune ‚the friend™ and laglinek ‚the friends™ had different morphological structures: whereas in the singular the determiner was a suffix, the plural determiner was still a clitic and triggered the insertion of a boundary accent: lagun+a vs. lagtin#ak.4 We saw above that comitative forms are accented, both in the plural and in the singular. 3 Lexically unaccented words and phrases will show final accentual prominence in isolation and when in focus position in the sentence. In other sentential contexts these words do not have any prosodically prominent syllable. 4 /a/ is raised to /e/ after a high vowel in certain morphological environments in many dialects, includ- ing Gemika and Markina. The morphological context for this rule is somewhat more complex in Mark- ina than in Gemika. J.I. Hualde I Lingua 1 IO (2000) 69429 10.5 The relatively recent incorporation of the preaccenting comitative suffix -gas to the inflectional paradigm is apparent from tine fact that, like postpositions, it appears after the absolutive inflection, not affixed directly to the stem: fugun-&gas ‚with the friend™, lag~n-ek-as ‚with the friends™ (< lugun-uk#gaz).5 Two other sources of accents are compounds, where a compound accent rule applied, and borrowings from Latin and Romance, where the original accentual pattern has been preserved (cf. Hualde, 1993): (8) Historical origin of accents _ Preaccenting suffixes: Clitic accent, e.g.: sugu~ uk > sugcirruk ‚the apples™ - Lexically accented stems: Compounds, e.g.: le(h)en ‚first™ + gusu ‚cousin™ (< Lat.) > Engusu, seme ‚son™ + ulubu ‚daughter™ > seme™ulabuk ‚sons and daughters™ Borrowings, e.g.: Lat. dominicu > dome™ku ‚Sunday™, Lat. uessicu > puxiku ‚bladder™ For reasons given in Hualde (1993), 1 take the system which has been described in this section to represent the historically most conservative situation. Very briefly, the reasons for considering that the Gemika accentual system is the most conserva- tive one of this group are of two types. First of all, and perhaps most importantly, certain distinctions in the position of accents that are made in Gemika, are neutral- ized in other varieties such as those of Markina, Lekeitio and Ondarroa. To give just one example, in Gemika le™kutik ‚from the place™, and busdtik ‚from the forest™ are accented on different syllables (a fact which is explainable on etymological and mor- phological grounds: in le™kutik both the stem and the suffix are lexically accented, in basbtik only the suffix carries a lexical accent). On the other hand, in Markina we find le™kutik, bcisctik, with the accent on the first syllable in both words, and in Lekeitio we have lektitik, basdtik, with accent on the second in both words (see Hualde et al., 1994). If we assume that the contrast in the position of the accent that is made in Gemika was also originally present in these other varieties, its loss in Markina and Lekeitio appears as a direct consequence of the sound changes that must be postulated for each of these dialects, as I will try to show for Markina in this paper. If, on the other hand, we were to assume that the orginal system lacked this contrast, its emergence in Gemika would be a puzzle. Secondly, we have direct confirmation in Larramendi™s (1729) description of the accentual system used in his time in central and western Basque dialects. Larra- mendi™s description, which is our first explicit source, appears to correspond essen- tially to the accentual system still used in the Gemika area (see Hualde, 1991). In the dialect of Markina, this system has been considerably restructured. While some of the changes that have taken place in Markina are phonetically based, sys- temically-based changes have played an important role in the restructuring of the system.The interest of such phenomena is that they help us to determine which lin- T As shown in (3). the ablative singular suffix -tik is also preaccenting. The reason for the anomalous accentual behavior of this suffix remains unclear. 106 J.I. Hualde I Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 guistic generalizations are psychologically real. In particular, some of the changes to be examined show that an essential part of linguistic knowledge is the existence of systematic correspondences between surface forms (cf. Hualde, 1999). In the rest of this paper, I will consider the evolution of the Markina accentual system starting from a stage that I take to be in all relevant aspects that still found in the Gemika area. 2. Phonetically and systemically-motivated changes in Markina As the examples in (9) show, in Markina unmarked phrases (containing only lex- ically unaccented words) receive phrase-penultimate prominence, instead of phrase- final prominence like in Gemika:6 (9) Markina: Unnaccented words blg6 Ine lal gun.4 I& hl gune da I& aI re la gd lne al re lagu ne da l&r cl re lagun aundi 1% guI re lagun aundixe I& aI re txistulari 6 Ina gu_I re txistulari ona I& ‚the friend™ ‚(it) is the friend™ ‚the friend is coming™ ‚our friend™ ‚our friend is coming™ ‚our great friend™ ‚(it) is our great friend™ ‚our good flutist™ ‚(it) is our good flutist™ The shift from phrase-final to phrase-penultimate accent has a clear articulatory motivation. Having a high tone on the last syllable is less than optimal from an artic- ulatory point of view, the physiologically-motivated tendency being to lower the pitch at the end of an utterance (Lieberman, 1972). In accordance with this phonetic tendency, cross-linguistic studies show that whereas demarcative stress on the initial 6 For the Markina data I want to thank Itziar San Martin, Ruben San Martin, Juan Ignacio Gallastegi, Marije Arrieta, Amaia Urriolabeitia, Luzi Etxabe, Myriam Etxabe, Aitzane Arrieta and Ane Agirre- gomezkorta. I am very grateful to my colleagues Gorka Elordieta and Xabier Bilbao, at the University of the Basque Country, for checking the data with some of the Markina speakers mentioned above. All errors are mine. J.1. Hualde I Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 107 syllable is very common (and stress on the second very rare), final stress, which, in principle, could fulfill the same demarcative function, is much less common than ini- tial stress. Instead, what we most commonly find is penultimate stress. The reason would appear to be an avoidance of a tonal peak in the last syllable. Synchronic or diachronic retraction of accents from the final to the penultimate is a relatively fre- quent phenomenon. It is found, for instance, in Serbo-Croatian (cf. Inkelas and Zec, 1988, among others). In many Bantu languages a high tone on the last syllable is also avoided (e.g. Downing, 1990, for Jita; Kenstowicz and Kisseberth, 1990, for Chizigula, etc.). The more interesting developments are found in the accentuation of words bear- ing a lexical accent. The correspondences between Gemika and Markina regarding lexically accented words are rather intricate. First of all, in some instances an accent introduced by a suffix has been shifted one syllable to the left. This is the case in the absolutive plural and also in the ablative singular: (10) Markina: Accented words. Leftward shift of accents introduced by suffixes Gemika Markina burtiek buruek - buruk ‚the heads™ lagunek lagunek ‚the friends™ alargunek alargunek ‚the widows™ mendiiek mendixek ‚the mountains™ pelotariiek pelotarixek ‚the ball-players™ guntzurrtinek guntzurrunek ‚the kidneys™ mendittik menditxik ‚from the mountain™ basotik basotik ‚from the forest™ In other cases, we find the accent on the same syllable in both dialects: (11) Markina: No shijii of accent Gemika Markina laguneri lagtine! lagunena lagunena lagunentzat lagunentzat lagunekin lagunekin erriietan errfxetan ‚to the friends, DAT pl™ ‚the one of the friends™ ‚for the friends™ ‚with the friends™ ‚in the villages™ Finally, there are also cases where the accent is shifted one or more syllables to the right in Markina when compared with the corresponding Gemika forms: (12) Markina: Rightward shiji of accents introduced by suffixes Gemika Markina lagunentzako lagunentzako ‚(of) for the friends™ 108 J.1. Hualde I Lingua I IO (2000) 69-129 lagdnentzakoa lagunentz&r(e) ‚the one for the friends™ mendiietatik mendixetatik ‚from the mountains™ mendiietara mendixCta7 ‚to the mountains, ALL pl™ mendiietako mendixetako ‚of the mountains™ mendiietakoa mendixet&_r(e) ‚the one of the mountains™ The question that arises is why we find these complex patterns of correspondence. What could have motivated accent shifts to the right in some instances and to the left in other cases? A generalization that emerges from a consideration of the data is that in the majority of cases lexical accents introduced by suffixes are realized on the antepenultimate syllable of the word in Markina. Both rightward and leftward shifts as well as maintenance of the accent can be explained if we assume that what trig- gered the different events was an emerging generalization that lexical accents appear on the antepenultimate syllable of the word: (13) Markina: Antepenultimate accent a. Antepenultimate accent in plural forms lagunek ‚the friends™ lagunei ‚to the friends™ ( < lagdneri)* lagunena ‚the one of the friends™ lagunene~ ‚to the ones of the friends™ lagunentzat ‚for the friends™ lagunentzako ‚(of) for the friends™ lagunentzakue ‚the one (of) for the friends™ b. Effects of accentually marked suffixes: Preaccenting suffixes in Gemika vs.antepenultimate accent in Markina Gemika Markina ‚the mountains™ ABS/ERG PL mendiiek DAT mendiieri GENpl + ABSsg mendiiena ABLsg mendittik ALLpl mendiietara ABLpl mendiietatik mendixek mendixei mendixena menditxik mendixeta (C mendixetara) mendixetatik (More extensive exemplification of singular and plural forms of regular items and comparison between Gemika and Markina can be found in Appendix B) ™ The reduction of the allative plural suffix from -erara to -eta in Markina is discussed below in Sec- tion 3. 8 Notice that the dative plural suffix -ei [ej] (<-et-i) counts as bisyllabic, as does the dative singular -ai [aj] (< -ari). This will be discussed below. J.I. Hualde I Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 109 Unlike in Gemika where words with lexically accented stems are accented on the same syllable throughout the paradigm, in Markina these lexical accents are also shifted to the antepenultimate of the word. This is illustrated in (14) (and additional examples are given in Appendix B): (14) Accented stems: Gernika vs. Markina Gemika leku lekue lekuentzat lekuentzako lekuetatik Markina leku lekue lekuantzat 
lekuantzako lekuetatik ‚place™ ‚the place™ ‚for the place™ ‚(of ) for the place™ ‚from the places™ The general accentual rules of Markina Basque are thus the following: ( 15) Markina: General accentual rules Unaccented words : Phrase-penultimate accent Accented words: Word-antepenultimate accent The rules governing this system are clearly rather different from those used in Gemika (given above in (7)). As mentioned above, the retraction of phrasal accents from the final to the penultimate is explainable on universal phonetic grounds. But, in the case of lexically accented words, what can be the path that led from a system where the placement of accents is determined by the morphological composition of the word to another system where lexical accents are attracted to a fixed position with respect to the end of the word (the antepenultimate syllable)? A possible scenario would be the following. The phonetically-motivated retraction of phrasal accents from the final to the penultimate syllable threatened most accentual contrasts. The change lag& > lagbne ‚the friend™ in regular singular forms, triggered a corresponding retraction laglinek > 16gunek ‚the friends™, with preservation of the systemic generalization that the accent occurs one syllable before in the plural than in the singular. The accent of singular forms is, as we mentioned, phrasal, but the gen- eralization would be based on the accentual pattern these words take in isolation and in phrase-final position, which is the most salient context. Since, prior to this shift, most lexical accents which were not penultimate were in fact antepenultimate, after the shift only a relatively small number of marked forms would have presented lex- ical accent on a syllable other than the antepenultimate. These were eventually reg- ularized to the new emergent pattern, with shift of the accent to the antepenultimate: IPkuana > lekriana ‚the one of the place™, kbnpotarra > kanpdtarra ‚the outsider™. The relevant sound changes can thus be summarized as follows: (16) Markina: Accentual changes a. Final accent > penultimate accent. Motivation: Phonetic lagune™ > lagbe 110 J.I. Hualde i Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 b. Shift of lexical accents to the antepenultimate. Motivation: Systemic Stage I: Penultimate accent > antepenultimate laglinek > lhgunek (because of lagme™ > laghe) Stage II: All remaining lexical accents shift to the antepenultimate Mkuana > lektiana, kbnpotarra > kanpbtarra What we see is that a phonetically-grounded change, the retraction of the accent from the final syllable to the penultimate in lexically unaccented phrases, triggered the application of a compensatory system-based change moving lexical accents from the penult to the antepenultimate. In this way an existing correspondence between paradigmatically related forms was preserved, i.e., the generalization that in the absolutive/ergative plural the accent occurs one syllable earlier than in the corre- sponding singular form. This, in turn, gave rise to the new generalization that lexical accents typically occur on the antepenultimate and caused the shift to this syllable to all remaining lexical accents. System-based or analogical changes have thus been as general in their scope as the initial phonetically-motivated change. It is important to realize that the system-based changes were by no means inevitable consequences of the modification in the patterns caused by the phonetic sound change. That the changes took place reveals that speakers had abstracted cer- tain generalizations regarding accentual correspondences and that the analogical innovations that preserved them prevailed in the community. But this not a pre- dictable consequence. This is apparent when we consider the situation in other speech communities. In neighboring Ondarroa (cf. Hualde, 1996), the retraction to the penultimate of phrasal-accents did not trigger any repair mechanism for the accentuation of lexi- tally-accented words. The result is that now many contrasts between lexically- accented and unaccented words are neutralized phrase-finally and are only preserved in other positions. For instance, as shown in (17), the accentual distinction between unaccented singular ghona ‚the man™ and the plural gixbnak ‚the men™, which bears a lexical accent, is lost when the word is in final position, even if it is maintained elsewhere: ( 17) Ondarroa Singular (unaccented) Plural (accented) gixdna ‚the man™ gixonak ‚the men™ gixona ra ‚(it) is the man™ gixonak tis ‚(they) are the men™ gixona r&or ‚the man is coming™ gixonak tatos ‚the men are coming™ In Antzuola (cf. Hualde, 1998), on the other hand, the retraction to the antepenul- timate of lexical accents (Stage I in 16b) did take place, as in Markina, together with the change from final to penultimate phrasal accentuation. But this did not give rise to the generalization that all lexical accents are antepenultimate (Stage II in 16b). Instead, in the case of plural forms, the generalization that triumphed is that the absolutive/ergative plural determines the position of the accent for all other plural J.I.Hualde l Lingua 110(2000)69-129 III forms, which was true of the original system. Now the accent consistently falls two syllables before the triggering suffix throughout the plural paradigm (the same is true with other accented suffixes) : (18) Antzuola mutill-ak mutill-ena 
mutill-endako ‚the boys™ (cf. Gemika mutill-ek) ‚the one of the boys™ (cf. Gemika mutfll-ena) ‚for the boys™ (cf. Gemika mutfll-entzako) The presumably uncontroversial claim is that the mental lexicon is organized as a system, from which linguistically significant patterns and generalizations are extracted. When, as in the case at hand, the stability of the system is threatened by phonetic sound change, new generalizations will emerge or old generalizations will reestablish themselves, triggering ‚compensatory™ changes. Indeed, different speak- ers may come up with different generalizations, and sociolinguistic factors will determine which ones prevail in a given speech community. The accentual rules given for the Markina system in (15) were exceptionless, in all likelihood, in the not-too-distant past, but a number of exceptions have arisen as a consequence of syllable contraction and vowel loss. These exceptions will be con- sidered in the following section. 3. Exceptions The generalizations regarding the distribution of lexical and phrasal accents given above in ( 15) have several exceptions which can be explained as the result of more recent segmental sound changes. A first such case in presented by the absolutive plural forms exemplified in (19b). These are words whose stem ends in -a. Whereas the absolutive plural of all other stems obeys the antepenultimate accent rule, stems ending in -a have penultimate accent instead: ( 19) Markina: ABS pl Uninfl ABS pl a. erri argal sagar b. alaba elixa Crrixek ‚the towns™ Brgalak ‚the skinny ones™ sagarrak ‚the apples™ alabak (NOT *alabak) ‚the daughters™ elixak ‚the churches™ The most likely explanation is that the plural forms in (19b) also underwent accent shift historically. With stems ending in -a, morphological concatenation orig- inally produced a sequence of two identical vowels, which has been simplified. To explain why these forms have penultimate instead of antepenultimate accent, we 112 J.I. Hualde I Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 must assume that the reduction of the vowel sequence took place after the shift of the accent to the antepenultimate: (20) Markina: Vowel shortening in plural forms of a-stems Accent shift Shortening alaba-ak > alabaak > alabak ‚the daughters™ cf. sagarr-ak > sagarrak ‚the apples™ Long vowels in the absolutive/ergative plural of stems ending in -a (as in afabaak) are well documented in old western Basque texts and are still currently found in cer- tain isolated areas such as Otiati. For the Markina variety, Mogel™s Peru Abarca, written around 1800, contains such long vowels. Uriarte writes such vowels in his 1857 translation of Matthew™s Gospel into literary Bizkaian but not in his 1858 trans- lation of Solomon™s Song into the Markina dialect. We may conclude that in Uri- arte™s time the long vowels were in the process of being reduced. Assuming, as we must, that accent shift took place before the reduction of long vowels, this provides us with a terminus ad quem for dating the accent shift. (Unfortunately Rollo™s 1925 linguistic description of Markina Basque does not offer any accentual information.) Both in the dative and in some allative forms we find final accent in the singular and penultimate accent in the plural: (21) Markina: Dative and allative forms Singular Plural DAT lagunaj ‚to the friend™ lagline! ‚to the friends™ ALL etxa ‚to the house™ en-ix&a ‚to the towns™ Interdialectal comparison shows that the anomalous accentuation can be explained as a result of vowel contraction following deletion of intervocalic /-r-/ preceded by a nonhigh vowel. First of all, in the dative the loss of a suffix-internal /-r-/ gave rise to a final falling diphthong, disturbing the original syllable count: (22) Markina: Dative *lagun&i > lagunai ‚to the friend™ (cf. Gemika laguneri) *laguneri > lagtinei ‚to the friends™ (cf. Gemika laguneri) In the allative singular, the /r/ is suffix initial and has not been lost in forms where the preceding vowel is high: (23) Markina: Allative singular *elixara > elixaa > elixa ‚to the church™ *etxCra > *etxCa > etxa ‚to the house™ cf. errfre ‚to the town™ bunire ‚to the head™ J.I. Hualde I Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 113 We can conclude that these dative and allative forms were historically accented according to the generalizations in (15) before the loss of /-r-/. After the segmental changes, they became irregular. Of these forms the most asystematic one, from the point of view of the present system is the allative plural. The contraction in the end- ing -emu > eta has brought the accentual pattern of the allative plural out of line with respect to the other plural local cases, where antepenultimate accentuation is observed. Consider the examples in (24). Starting from a stage where in plural forms the accent fell on the syllable preceding the plural suffix (as in the present-day Gemika system), the accent was moved to the antepenultimate in forms which did not previously conform to this generalization, by the evolution discussed above. One generalization (plural suffixes are preaccenting) was replaced by another (plural forms have antepenultimate accent) at this point in time. Subsequently, the contrac- tion in the allative plural has made this form exceptional: (24) Markina: Plural local cases Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 errixetara > *errixCtara > errixeta ‚to the towns™ errixetan = errfxetan = errixetan ‚in the towns™ errixetatik > errixetatik = errixetatik ‚from the towns™ Consider also the following contrast (also obtaining in neighboring Ondarroa, cf. Hualde, 1996) : (25) Markina: dago > da argala da ‚s/he is thin™ (cf. Sp. es delgado) argala da (< dago) ‚s/he is, looks thin™ (cf. Sp. esta delgado) Phrase-final accent in the second example in (25) is the result of a historical con- traction: dago > duo > da. These are localized changes which have taken place after the accentuation of lex- ically unaccented and accented words had been regularized according to the gener- alizations in (15) and, in general, have not triggered any reaction to restore regular- ity. Nevertheless some speakers show a regularizing shift with accented stems in the allative plural. For accented stems such as /‚leku/ ‚place™, /‚beste/ ‚other™, whereas some speakers employ the allative plural forms lekue™tu - leklita ‚to the places™, bestie™ta - besti™ta ‚to the others™ other speakers prefer leklieta, besti™etu. The complete historical evolution would be as follows: 16kueturu (= Gemika) > lekue™tura (by shift to the antepenultimate) > 1ekuPtaa (by -Y- deletion) > lekue™tu (by degemination) > lektita (by vowel deletion). The forms lekue™ta - lektita are asystematic in not show- ing antepenultimate accent. Some speakers have removed this irregularity by adopt- ing the innovative accentuation lektieta, which conforms with the general pattern for words with accented stems. There are also some exceptions to the generalization that all lexical accents fall on the antepenultimate which do not have their origin in a contraction. Uninflected 114 J.I. Hualdel Lingua 110(2000)69-129 accented stems have penultimate accent. The reason for this appears to be a more specific rule stating that uninflected forms are accented on the same syllable as the absolutive singular (which is the citation form in Basque): (26) Markina: Accented stems Uninfl ABSsg ABSpl DATsg lengosu lengosu(e) lengosu(e)k lengosdai ‚male cousin™ baserrftxar baserrftxarra baserrftxarrak baserritxarrai ‚farmer™ Cgi Cgixe Cgixek egixai ‚truth™ bigarren bigarrena big&rem& bigarrenai ‚second™ bel&li belarrixe behirrixek belarrfxai ‚ear™ cf. Gemika lengusu lengusue lengusuek lengusueri baserrittar baserrittarra baserrittarrak basCnittarrari Cgi I .Y egize Cgiiek I .Y egizeri bigarren bigarrena bigarrenak bigarrenari belarri belarriie behirriiek belarriieri This generalization also accounts for the accentuation of genitive plural forms: laghen ‚of the friends™ like laglinena ‚the one of the friends™. 4. On-going segmental changes with accentual consequences A more sweeping change than those studied in the previous section is the deletion of a second vowel in a sequence of two. This is a sound change which has affected a number of Basque varieties. In Markina it is still a change in progress. In other varieties, such as that of Getxo, the deletion of final vowels in hiatus has triggered important accentual changes. In Getxo we find basically the same accentual system we have described for the Gemika area (cf. Hualde and Bilbao, 1992, 1993). One segmental development, which has had an effect on accentuation is that a vowel [a] or [e] has been lost when it occurred immediately after another vowel, as shown in (27a). This should have resulted in lexical penultimate accent becoming word final, with consequent neutral- ization of accented and unaccented words in phrase-final position. This is not, how- ever, what happened. What we find, instead, is that together with vowel deletion we find retraction of lexical accents, as in (27b):9 9 The same phenomenon of vowel deletion with accent retraction also took place in Ondarroa, cf. Hualde (1996). It is worth noticing that in many cases the accented vowel underwent deletion. As a reviewer points out, this is surely related to the tonal nature of the accent in these Basque varieties. The deletion of the accented vowel would be unexpected in a stress-accent language. J.I.HualdelLiqua llO(2000) 69-129 11s (27) Getxo: Vowel deletion a. Singular unaccented words (phrasal accent): vowel deletion basoa > base ‚the forest™ iturrie > iturrf ‚the spring™ b. Plural words: vowel deletion and accent retraction basoak > b&ok (NOT *basok) ‚the forests™ iturriek > iturrik (NOT *iturrrk) ‚the springs™ The resulting system maintains an important generalization which existed before the deletion of final vowels: in the absolutive of all unmarked items the accent in the plural falls one syllable earlier than in the phrase-final singular, both with consonant- final and with vowel-final stems. This regularity has been preserved by shifting the accent to the left in those cases where a vowel has been deleted, as in (28b): (28) Getxo Singular ABS lagune ERG lagunek DAT laguneri ABS iturri ERG iturrrk DAT iturriri Plural lagunek ‚friend™ lagdnek laguneri iturrik ‚spring™ iturrik iturriri Notice that for vowel-final stems such as iturri, the accent in the plural falls now on the penultimate of the stem. It has thus shifted from stem-final to stem-penulti- mate. The regularity that has been preserved by shifting the accent is that, both with consonant-final and with vowel-final stems, plural forms have word-penultimate accent in the absolutive, which is the basic form in the paradigm. Again, this system- based change provides us with information on the generalizations that have psycho- logical reality for speakers. It must be the case that, as final vowels deleted after another vowel, a systemi- cally motivated accentual shift applied to restore regularity to the accentual corre- spondences. Before the vowels were lost, the system contained the following reg- ularities (among others): (a) if the absolutive singular (basic form) has phrase-final accent, the absolutive plural has word-penultimate accent, (b) all other plural forms are accented on the same vowel as the absolutive. The phonetically moti- vated deletion of final vowels in hiatus threatened the regularity of the accentual system. This resulted in a shift of word-penultimate accents to the new penultimate position: (29) Getxo: Summary of changes a. Vowel deletion: a, e > 0 / V_ Motivation: Phonetic b. Accent shift: VCV™V > V™CV0. Motivation: Systemic 116 J.1. Hualde I Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 Phrase-final accent is found in Markina in words where a final vowel is deleted. The vowels [a], [e] are variably deleted immediately after another vowel. In Mark- ina this is still an on-going, optional process, which is preferred by younger speak- ers (unlike in Getxo and Ondarroa where the deletion has become obligatory for all speakers). In accented words the optional deletion of final vowels in hiatus produces an alternation between antepenultimate and penultimate accent: (30) Markina: Optional vowel deletion a. Unaccented words: Phrase penultimate - Final accent bunie - buni ‚the head™ neskie - neski ‚the girl™ etxie - etxi ‚the house™ mendiktie - mendikii ‚the one of the mountain™ alabie - alabi ‚the daughter™ buruantzakue - buruantzakti ‚the one for the head™ b. Accented words: Word antepenultimate - Penultimate accent bliruek - btiruk ‚the heads™ Ctxiek - Ctxik ‚the houses™ mendtkuek - mendtkuk ‚the ones of the mountain™ buruentz6kue - buruentz6ku ‚the ones for the head™ As long as this deletion is only an optional process, the system may remain more or less stable. If the deletion becomes obligatory, as it has happened in other towns such as Getxo and neighboring Ondarroa, the result could be a new restructuring of the accentual system, as new generalizations emerge. Since the accent was previously retracted in the plural, the loss of final vowels does not threaten the singular/plural distinction, unlike what we have seen for Getxo. When the vowel that is deleted is word-internal, for some speakers there is a con- comitant shift of lexical accents to the new antepenultimate: (3 1) Markina: Synchronic deletion-cum-accent shift a. bestiekin - bestikin ‚with the other ones™ bestietan - b&titan ‚in the other ones™ b. Gemika Markina buniekin buniekin - burukin ‚with the heads™ bunietako buruetako - bunitako ‚of the heads™: This shows that the antepenultimate accent generalization is still an operative one, which in some cases is analogically restored, in spite of the exceptions. 5. Conclusion The unusual set of correspondences between Gemika and Markina regarding the position of lexical accents has been explained as a consequence of the attraction of J.I. H&de I Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 117 lexical accents to the antepenultimate syllable at some recent historical point in the Markina dialect, resulting in both lefward and rightward shifts. This change cannot be explained phonetically. Rather, we have proposed that it was initiated as a reac- tion to the phonetically-motivated movement of phrase-final accents to the penulti- mate and was analogically extended when new generalizations emerged. We have seen that a systemic reaction of the same type is also apparent in the dialect of Getxo, motivated in this case by the deletion of final vowels. What we see is an interplay between phonetically motivated sound changes (deletion of vowels, retrac- tion from phrase-final to phrase-penultimate accent) and systemic forces operating on the basis of emerging generalizations. The mental lexicon is highly structured and speakers are able to extract existing generalizations. In languages like the Basque dialects examined here, which possess a large number of productive morphophonological alternations (both segmental and accentual), speakers must establish relatively complex correspondences between forms within and across morphological paradigms. When phonetically-based sound change alters the nature of the existent correspondences, speakers will produce new generalizations, even if this involves further changes (of an analogical nature). In the case that has been examined, the analogical generalization of lexical patterns and correspondences has played a very important role in guiding sound change. The gen- eral conclusion to be drawn is that analogy or systemic change can be as general and regular as phonetically-driven sound change. In so far as system-driven changes give us information regarding which generalizations are psychologically significant for the speakers of the language, their study possesses considerable importance for lin- guists. Appendix A: Accented and unaccented words, FO tracings In the examples for which F@ tracings are provided, the plural forms /a&nen ‚of the friends™ (contrasting with lagunen ‚of the friend™) and s&en ‚your-pl™ as well as amha ‚grandmother™ have lexical accents. The fact to be noticed is that accented words are charac- terized by a pitch fall on the posttonic, whereas unaccented words lack such a pitch move- ment. The tracings were obtained from a young female speaker of the variety of Bermeo (Gemika type): _-----___-------- ..==.........=........,mmm..====.ﬂ=.~~.,m.ﬂ.mmmmmm --_.----------- ------ - .- Fig. I. nit-e lagunen mna da ‚(it) is the mother of my friend™ I I 4.wmcc D: 0.472w 1: 3.6oooo I: 3.87200 (F: E 0: 0.47200 1: u: 3.972m (F: 1 .,. . , ?.400829e-01 I/----- r - ac_aez 4.394055e4r t-4 Fl ~__~_____~__.._~_ ---=- ---_-- t==li Fig. 2. niw logrinen un~u da ‚(it) is the mother of my friends™ J.I. Hualde I Lingua I10 (2000) 69-129 /: ™ Ir I it If I! I 81 - _-- --- Fig. 4. nit-e Iu,&en umtima da ‚(it) is the grandmother of my friends™ E k G E fz P. $ E 2 0 ‚i3 8 s -------- ---- 7 s Fig. 5. &en fqunen ama da ‚(it) is the mother of your-p1 friend™ c-peak 5.735649e Rs 5.1090T9e+01 voice 3.091241e-0 Fig. 6. slien lagtinen ama da ‚(it) is the mother of your-pi friends™mother of your-p1 friends™ - - L-r - - -I --- .- ----------- --J_- -I -5 -E i 150 - 1-L - - - - _I----ri_ __ . - ?a, --- -_________ - - - -I- L- ---_ - five -r: 2o.Rss77 IWSERT Km Fig. 7. s&n Iagunen amima da ‚(it) is the grandmother of your-p1 friend™ Fig. 8. slirrl lugLiwn umtimu du ‚(it) is the grandmother of your-p1 friends™ 126 J.I. Hualde I Lingua 110 (2000) 69429 Appendix B: Nominal paradigms: Gernika vs. Markina B.I. Unaccented stems: lagun ‚friend™, erri ‚village™, buru ‚head™ B.I.I. Gernika (words not provided with an accent mark receive final accent in isolation) Singular Plural ABS ERG 
DAT GEN GEN+ABSsg BEN 
BEN+ko BEN+ABSsg COM LOC erriien ALL errire ABL errfttik GEN-L erriko GEN-LiABSsg errikoa GEN-L+ABSpl errikoak ABS ERG DAT GEN GEN+ABSsg BEN BEN+ko BEN+ABSsg COM LOC ALL ABL GEN-L burue buruek burueri buruen (ulie) buruena buruentzat buruentzako buruentzakoa buruegas buruen burure bunitik buruko (ulie) lagune lagunek laguneri lagunen (etzie) lagunena lagunentzat lagunentzako lagunentzakoa lagunegas laglinek laglinek laguneri laglinen (etzie) lagunena lagunentzat lagiinentzako lagdnentzakoa lagunekin lagdnekas erriietan erriietara erriietatik 
erriietako erriietakoa erriietakoak buruek buruek burtieri bunien (ulie) burtIena burtientzat buruentzako buriientzakoa 
buruekin buruetan buruetara bunietatik bunietako (ulie) ‚the friend/ s™ ‚the friend/s™ ‚to the friend/s™ ‚(the house) of the friend/s™ ‚the one of the friend/s™ ‚for the friend/s™ ‚(of) for the friend/s™ ‚the one for the friend/s™ ‚with the friend/s™ ‚in the village/s™ ‚to the village/s™ ‚from the village/s™ ‚of the village/s™ ‚the one of the village/s™ ‚the ones of the village/s™ ‚the head/s™ ‚the head/s™ ‚to the head/s™ ‚(the hair) of the head/s™ ‚the one of the head/s™ ‚for the head/s™ ‚(of) for the head/s™ ‚the one for the head/s™ ‚with the head/s™ ‚on the head/s™ ‚to the head/s™ ‚from the head/s™ ‚(the hair) on the head/s™ B.1.2. Markina (penultimate andfinal accent in singular forms is phrasal, as indicated in the text) ABS ABS+copula ERG DAT GEN GEN+ABS sg Singular lagiine lagune da laglinek lagunai lagunan 
lagunana Plural lagunek lagunek di lagunek laghnei 
laglinen lagdnena ‚the friend/s™ ‚(he) is the friend/ (they) are the friends™ ‚the friend/s™ ‚to the friend/s™ ‚of the friend/s™ ‚the one of the friend/s™ J.I. Hualde I Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 127 BEN BEN+ko +copula BEN+ABSsg COM LOC ALL ABL GEN-L GEN-L+ABSsg GEN-L+ABSpl ABS ERG DAT GEN+ABSsg GEN+DATsg BEN BEN+ko +copula BEN+ABSsg COM lagunantzat lagunantz&ko lagunantzako da lagunantzakti(e) lagunasrO errixen errire 
erritxik erriko erriku(e) errl<u(e)k Singular burlie - bur6 buruek - burtik buruai buruana buruanai buruantzat buruantzako buruantzako da buruantzaku(e) burlias laglinentzat lagunentzako lagunentzako da lagunentzaku(e) lagiinekin errixetan errixeta 
errixetatik 
errixetako errixetaku(e) errixedku(e)k Plural bdruek - btiruk buruek - biiruk buruei buruena buruenei buruentzat buruentzako burudntzako da buruentzaku(e) buruekin - btirukin B.2. Accented stems: leku ‚place™, beste ‚other™ B.2.1. Gernika Singular Plural ABS ERG DAT 
GEN BEN BEN+ko BEN+ABSsg COM LOC ALL ABL GEN-L lekue lekuek lekueri lekuen lekuentzat lekuentzako lekuentzakoa 
lekuegas lekuen lekure lekutik lekuko lekuek Iekuek lekueri 16kuen lekuentzat Iekuentzako lekuentzakoa lekuekin lekuetan lekuetara lekuetatik lekuetako ABS ERG DAT GEN b&tie bestiek b6stieri bestien b&tiek b&.tiek b&.tieri bestien ‚for the friend/s™ ‚(of) for the friend/s™ ‚(it) is for the friend/s™ ‚the one for the friend/s™ ‚with the friend/s™ ‚in the village/s™ ‚to the village/s™ ‚from the village/s™ ‚of the village/s™ ‚the one of the village/s™ ‚the ones of the village/s™ ‚the head/s™ ‚the head/s™ ‚to the head/s™ ‚the one of the head/s™ ‚to the one of the h/s™ ‚for the head ‚(of) for the head/s ‚(it) is for the head/s™ ‚the one for the h/s™ ‚with the head/s™ ‚the place/s™ ‚the place/s™ ‚to the place/s™ ‚of the place/s™ ‚for the place/s™ ‚(of) for the place/s™ ‚the one for the pi/s™ ‚with the place/s™ ‚in the place/s™ ‚to the place/s™ ‚from the place/s™ ‚of the place/s™ ‚the other/s™ ‚the other/s™ ‚to the other/s™ ‚of the other/s™ I0 The comitative has lexical accent, cf. lagune d&or ‚the friend is coming™ and la&m d&or ‚s/he is coming with the friend™. This is a contracted form: lapinas < lagtinegus. 128 J.I. Hualde I Lingua 110 (2000) 69-129 BEN BEN+ko BEN+ABSsg COM LOC 
ALL 
ABL GEN-L B.2.2. Markina ABS 1Ckue - 1Cku ERG lCku(e)k DAT lekliaj GEN+ABSsg lekhana GEN+DATsg lekuinaj BEN lekliantzat BEN+ko lekdntzako COM lekdas ALL 1Ckure ABL 1Ckutik GEN-L ICkuko GEN-L+ABSsg lekdkue - lekliku ABS ERG 
DAT 
GEN+ABSsg COM LOC ALL ABL GEN-L bestientzat bt%tientzako b&tientzakoa b&tiegas b6stien Estera bCstetik bCsteko Singular b&tie - b&ti bCsti(e)k bestiai bestiana bestias bCstien - b&tin bestera b&tetik bestCkue - bestCku bbstientzat Wstientzako Wstientzakoa 
bCstiekin bCstietan Kstietara bkstietatik bCstietako ‚for the other/s™ ‚(of) for the other/s™ ‚the one for the othr/s™ ‚with the other/s™ ‚in the other/s™ ‚to the other/s™ ‚from the other/s™ ‚of the other/s™ Plural 1Ckuek - 1Ckuk ‚the place/s™ lCku(e)k ‚the place/s™ lekliei ‚to the place/s™ lekliena ‚the one of the place/s™ lekdnei ‚to the one of the pi/s™ leklientzat ‚for the place/s™ 1ekuCntzako ‚(of) for the place/s™ lekliekin - 1Ckukin ‚with the place/s™ 1ekuCta - leklita ‚to the place/s™ (- lektieta)ﬂ lekdatik - leklitatik ‚from the place/s™ 1ekuCtako - lektitako ‚of the place/s™ lekuetakue - ‚the one of the pi/s™ lekudku(e) bCstiek - bCstik ‚the other/s™ bCsti(e)k ‚the other/s™ bestiei ‚to the other/s™ bestiena ‚the one of the other/s™ bestiekin - b&tikin ‚with the other/s™ bestietan - b&titan ‚in the other/s™ bestiCta - bestita ‚to the other/s™ (-bestieta) bestiktatik - bestitatik ‚from the other/s™ bestietakue - ‚the one of the other/s™ bestitakue - bestietau - bestitaku References Browman, Catherine and Louis Goldstein, 1991. Gestural structures: Distinctiveness, phonological processes, and historical change. In: Ignatius G. Mattingly and Michael Studdert-Kennedy (eds.), Modularity and the motor theory of speech perception: Proceedings of a conference to honor Alvin M. Liberman, 313-338. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. ‚I Some speakers use lekuhta and lekrita in free variation. Other speakers use lekriefa instead. The rea- son for this variation is explained in the text. J.I. Hualde I Linguu 110 (2000) 69-129 129 Bybee, Joan, 1997. Lexicalization of sound change and alternating environments. To appear in Labora- tory Phonology 5. Cohn, Abigail, 1993. Nasalization in English: Phonology or phonetics. Phonology IO, 43-82. Donegan, Patricia, 1993. On the phonetic basis of phonological change. In: Charles Jones (ed.), Histor- ical linguistics: Problems and perspectives, 98-130. Harlow: Longman. Downing, Laura, 1990. Problems in Jita tonology. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Illinois. Harris, Martin, 1988. French. In: Martin Harris and Nigel Vincent (eds.). The Romance languages. 209-245. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Hayes, Bruce, 1996. Phonetically driven phonology: The role of Optimality Theory and inductive grounding. UCLA, ms. To appear in the proceedings of the 1996 Milwaukee Conference on Formal- ism and Functionalism in Linguistics. Hualde. Jose I., 1991. Manuel de Larramendi y el acento vasco. Anuario de1 Seminario de Filologia Vasca Julio de Urquijo 25, 737-749. Hualde. Jose I., 1993. On the historical origin of Basque accentuation. Diachronica 10, 13-50. Hualde. Jose I., 1995. Reconstructing the ancient Basque accentual system: Hypotheses and evidenceﬂ. In: Jose I. Hualde, Joseba Lakarra and R.L. Trask (eds.), Towards a history of the Basque language, 171-188. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Hualde, Jose I., 1996. Accentuation and empty vowels in Ondarroa Basque: Against the concept of phonological derivation. Lingua 99, 197-206. Hualde, Jose I., 1998. A gap filled: Postpostinitial accent in Azkoitia Basque. Linguistics 36, 99-117. Hualde, Jose I., 1999. Vowel interaction and related phenomena in Basque and the nature of mor- phophonological knowledge. Cognitive Linguistics lO( 1 ), 33-56. Hualde, Jose I. and Xabier Bilbao, 1992. A phonological study of the Basque dialect of Getxo. Anuario del Seminario de Filologia Vasca Julio de Urquijo 26, l-l 17. Hualde, Jose I. and Xabier Bilbao, 1993. The prosodic system of the Basque dialect of Getxo: A metri- cal analysis. Linguistics 3 I, 59-85. Hualde, Jose I., Gorka Elordieta and Arantzazu Elordieta. 1994. The Basque dialect of Lekeitio. Bilbao and Donostia-San Sebastian: University of the Basque Country and Diputacion de Gipuzkoa. Inkelas, Sharon and Draga Zec, 1988. Serbo-Croatian pitch accent. Language 64, 277-248. Kenstowicz, Michael and Charles Kisseberth, 1990. Chizigula tonology: The word and beyond. In: Sharon Inkelas and Draga Zec,s, IN, The phonology-syntax connection. 163-184. Chicago, IL: Uni- versity of Chicago Press. Lieberman, Philip, 1972. Speech acoustics and perception, Indianapolis. IN: Bobbs-Merrill. Labov, William, 1994. Principles of linguistic change, vol. 1: Internal factors. Oxford: Blackwell. Larramendi, Manuel, 1729. El impossible vencido: arte de la lengua baacongada. Salamanca: Antonio J. Villagordo Alcaraz. [Repr., Donostia: Hordago, 1979.1 Martinet, Andre. 1955. Economic des changements phonetiques. Beme: Francke. Michelena, Luis. 1981. Lengua corntin y dialectos vascos. Anuario del Seminario de Filologia Vasca Julio de Urquijo 15, 291-313. [Repr., 1987, in Palabras y textos, 35-55. Leioa: Univ. de1 Pais Vasco.] Moguel, Juan Antonio, 188 1. El doctor Peru Abarca. Durango [written about 18001. Mowrey, Richard and William Pagliuca, 1995. The reductive character of articulatory evolution. Rivista di Linguistica 7( l), 37-l 24. Rollo, William, 1925. The Basque dialect of Marquina. Amsterdam: Paris. Silverman, Daniel, 1997. Alveolar stops in American English, and the nature of allophony. Presented at NELS 28, Toronto. Silverman, Daniel, 1998. On the functional nature of allophony. University of Illinois, ms. Uriarte. Jose Antonio, 1857. El evangelio segun San Mateo. traducido al vascuence, dialect0 vizcaino. London. [Repr., 1991, in Louis Lucien Bonaparte, Opera Omnia Vasconice IV, 3 I-I 12. Bilbao: Euskaltzaindia.] Uriarte, Jose Antonio, 1862. Le Cantique des Cantiques de Salomon, traduit en basque biscayen central tel qu™il est communement par16 aux environs de Bilbao, et acompagne d™une traduction en basque biscayen litteraire de Marquina. London [Repr., 1991, in Louis Lucien Bonaparte, Opera Omnia Vas- conice IV, 439452. Bilbao: Euskaltzaindia.] 