ELSEVIER Lingua 1l0(2000)147-155 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Book review Chris Collins, Local economy. Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 29. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1997. 148 pp. Hisatsugu Kitahara, Elementary operations and optimal derivations. Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 3 1. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1997. 140 pp. Reviewed by Sjef Barbiers, Department of Dutch Studies, Leiden University, PO Box 9515, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands. tntroduction When the results of a game just played are unsatisfactory, the next game can be of several types.™ First, one could replay the game to see what went wrong where; sec- ondly, one could replay the game with modified rules to see if it yields better results; thirdly, one could play a new game and see which rules yield better results, the old ones or the modified ones. Modification of the rules is a delicate matter that should be handled with care. At least the resulting rules should have an intuitive appeal. If the Minimalist Program (MPLT; Chomsky, 1993, 1995) is a game, Hisatsugu Kitahara™s Elementary operations and optimal derivations can be characterized as a mixture of the first and second game type. Kitahara first shows that the results of MPLT in the domain of syntactic movement are fairly good. In chapter 3, he con- vincingly argues that the empirical generalizations expressed by relativized mini- mality (Rizzi, 1990), the Superiority Condition (Chomsky, 1973), the Proper Bind- ing Condition (Fiengo, 1977), the Nested Dependency Condition (Pesetsky, 1982, 1987) follow nicely from the Minimal Link Condition (Chomsky, 1995). In chapter 4, Kitahara shows that with a minor modification of the rules, i.e. a new condition on chain formation, an insightful and elegant new explanation can be given of degrees of deviance of extraction. The idea underlying this novel condition on chain formation is that illegitimate movement (illegitimate ‚with respect to the Minimal Link Condition) does not lead to chain formation. By assumption, a chain will nevertheless be formed if the illegitimate movement operation is followed by a legitimate movement operation involving (features of) the same element. For example, when an Object is extracted from a WH-island in English, this vio- lates the Minimal Link Condition. However, the features of the moved object move ™ I thank Lisa Cheng and Johan Rooryck for helpful comments and suggestions. 0024-3841/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(99)00034-O 148 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 147-155 at LF for checking reasons, and this yields a chain that includes the preposed Object. Subjects and Adjuncts do not involve covert feature movement, the former because they move to a checking position overtly, the latter because they have nothing to check. Therefore, Subject and Adjunct extraction from a WH-island is worse than Object extraction from a WH-island: whereas the latter still formes a chain with its trace, the former do not. When no chain can be formed, full interpretation at LF is impossible, for example because a constituent cannot be interpreted in its theta-position, in a position adja- cent to its modifiee, or because a quantifier does not have a variable to quantify over. Indeed, the cases in which no chain can be formed involve an interpretation problem, which makes this account intuitively plausible. This is illustrated in (1): whereas the extracted Object in (la) can be interpreted in its base position in the embedded clause despite a violation of the Minimal Link Condition, the extracted adjunct in (lb) cannot be interpreted in its base position in the embedded clause. (1) a. ??What,do you wonder [,-r whether John fixed t,] b. *How, do you wonder [cp whether John fixed the car ti] Elementary operations and optimal derivations is therefore an important contri- bution to the field. I specially recommend this book to those who did not feel too much attracted to Minimalism because they failed to see its advantages over the pre- minimalist Principles and Parameters framework. Particularly helpful is the clear introduction to Minimalism provided in chapter 1. Argumentation in the rest of the book is careful and lucid. The goal of Chris Collins™ Local economy is to show that local evalution of the economy of a syntactic derivation, i.e. evaluation of the legitimacy of every step in the derivation, is superior to the global evaluation proposed in Chomsky™s work. Here we seem to be dealing with a game of the second type: replay an old game with new rules. The idea of local economy is conceptually very attractive and will have (in fact already has, cf. Chomsky, 1998) a great impact in the field. The idea and its consequences are presented in a very transparent way. Like Kitahara™s book, this book is an important contribution. However, the claim that local economy is not only conceptually but also empirically superior to global economy (chapters 2 and 3) is not sufficiently substantiated, in my view: locative and quotative inversion do not provide conclusive evidence for that claim. In chapters 4 through 6, Collins tries to further reduce the theoretical apparatus of the Minimalist Program in a laudible way. For a thorough review of these proposals, see Oka (1999). Both books are replays of an old game in that they discuss a number of data that have been central to the theoretical developments in generative syntax of the past ten years. Unfortunately, in some respects the old game with new rules does not fare any better than with the old rules, as I will show below. The explanations provided for differences in V-placement, e.g. the fact that the position of finite verbs in English with respect to certain adverbs differs from the position of finite verbs in French, are not better than the existing ones. Similarly, these books do not bring any closer the solution to the problem of optionality of movement, e.g., Object Shift in Icelandic. Book review I Linguu 110 (2000) 147-155 149 Locative inversion, quotative inversion and global economy In Local economy two constructions are brought up as evidence for local economy and against global economy, Locative Inversion and Quotative Inversion. An exam- ple of Locative Inversion is given in (2). (2) a. John rolled down the hill. b. Down the hill rolled John. Locative Inversion is an exception to the generalization that inversion in English only applies to auxiliary verbs in WH-questions and with negative first constituents. This construction poses an interesting question that can be phrased differently depending on the theory adopted. In a theoretical framework based on von Hum- boldts principle of isomorphy of syntax and semantics, one might ask why one semantic interpretation can be expressed by two different syntactic forms, i.e. two different word orders. This question presupposes that the information expressed by (2a) and (2b) is equivalent. Indeed, truth conditionally the meaning of (2a) is equiv- alent to the meaning of (2b). But it is also clear that the information status of the constituents is different: John is obligatorily in focus in (2b), but not in (2a) (cf. Rochemont and Culicover, 1990). In the Minimalist Program, the isomorphy question reappears as a question about optionality. As Collins notes, the minimalist economy principles wrongly predict that Locative Inversion as in (2b) should not exist, as it is less economical than the non-inverted order in (2a). For example, (2b) could be taken to be derived from (2a) by movement of V and PP, as in (3). (3) a. John [v rolled] [rp down the hill] b. [rp Down the hill] [v rolled] John &r&l+ &w Movement is costly, therefore, Locative Inversion is more expensive than no inver- sion. According to Chomsky (1995) a cheaper derivation blocks a more expensive but equivalent derivation, hence Locative Inversion should be ungrammatical. From the fact that Locative Inversion does exist, Collins concludes that one of the assump- tions of the Minimalist Program is wrong: a cheaper derivation cannot block a more expensive derivation because there™s no such thing as global comparison of deriva- tions. The economy of a derivation is determined at every single step within that derivation. Although the idea of local economy is quite attractive in that it seems to reduce computational complexity considerably, Collins™ conclusion that Locative Inversion constitutes evidence against global economy can be challenged on at least two points. First, as was noted above, the information structure of the sentences in (2a) and (2b) is not identical: the subject in (2b), but not in (2a) is in focus obligatorily. In many languages, different information structure is marked by different syntactic structure. To compare the cost of two syntactic derivations, it is necessary to ensure that the constructs resulting from the derivations are semantically and pragmatically 150 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 147-155 completely equivalent. If they are not, they cannot be compared. Here, I disagree with Oka (1999) who argues that the burden of proof rests with approaches which assume an abstract lexical or structural difference between (2a) and (2b). It is true that any assumption of an abstract lexical or structural difference requires ample motivation, but here we are dealing with a directly observable interpretive difference that makes comparison of derivations impossible. A second problem for Collins™ conclusion is that it is not obvious that Locative Inversion requires more movement operations than no inversion. Collins assumes the following structure [rP . . . [T [TrP . . . Tr [vp Subject [v V [PP]]]]]]. In his analysis, the non-inverted derivation involves three steps: (i) V raises and adjoins to an abstract head Tr; (ii) DP raises to spec,TP; (iii) Tr raises and adjoins to T covertly. On the other hand, Locative Inversion would involve four steps: (i) V raises and adjoins to Tr; (ii) PP raises to spec,TP; (iii) Tr raises and adjoins to T covertly; (iv) FF(John) raise and adjoin to T covertly. Evidence for the covert steps is absent. These steps are motivated theory-internally, not empirically. Alternative analyses are conceiv- able that do not involve more steps in the derivation of the inverted order. The sim- plest possibility is given in (4): either the subject DP or the PP moves. (4) a. [DP John1 [v rolled] [op W [pp down the hill] b. [pp Down the hill] [v rolled] [oP John] &+w&&&# The derivations in (4) both involve one movement operation and therefore are equally costly, which predicts their simultaneous existence even in a theory with global comparison of the economy of a derivation. To be sure, the analysis of loca- tive inversion in (4) is too simple, but there exist analyses comparable to (4) that capture the properties of Locative Inversion very well, e.g. Hoekstra and Mulder (1990). As Collins notes himself (endnote 26, p. 134), the analysis of Den Dikken and Naess (1993) of Locative Inversion, which is based on Hoekstra and Mulder™s analysis, has the following advantages over his own: no feature movement is assumed, the two variants are predicted to be equally costly syntactically, and restrictions on the type of predicates that can be preposed are correctly explained. Locative Inversion, then, cannot be used to compare global and local economy approaches, because the proper analysis of Locative Inversion is an open issue. Not only because the number of steps in the derivation depends on the theory adopted, but also because there does not seem to be agreement on the basic properties of the construction. For example, whereas Rochemont and Culicover (1990: 71) claim that the constituent preposed in Locative Inversion can be larger than PP, as in [Into the room nude] walked John, Den Dikken (1992: 116) seems to doubt the grammatical- ity of such constructions. The fact that Collins™ analysis crucially employs feature movement is a serious drawback too. The reason why Chomsky (1995) introduced the mechanism of fea- ture movement is twofold, as far as I can see. First, once it is assumed that move- ment is triggered by features, the purest form of movement is movement of just fea- tures. Secondly, feature movement was necessary to capture agreement phenomena in expletive constructions such as There is a man in the garden. Since there in this Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 147-155 151 sentence is in subject position, which is the position where case and agreement of the subject are normally checked, the fact that a man agrees with is cannot be explained in the usual way, head specifier agreement at surface structure. In previous analyses within the Principles and Parameters framework, it was assumed that in such cases the subject moves to the position of there at LF. When Lasnik (1992) and Den Dikken (1995) had shown that this makes the wrong predictions with respect to scope and binding properties of the subject, LF-movement of the entire subject could no longer be maintained. To save his analysis, Chomsky had to assume that not the full subject but only some of its features moved at LF. However, many generative linguists have been sceptical about the existence of feature movement right from the start. One problem is that it is covert by definition and therefore hard to detect. The reason that we could never actually see feature movement would be that we cannot overtly pull apart a lexical item. This makes the story circular, since we might ask why language is not designed in such a way that every feature corresponds to exactly one morpheme, such that visible feature move- ment would always be possible. A second problem with feature movement is that the motivation for its existence was very weak. When the point was reached in the analysis of expletive construc- tions at which LF-movement of the subject could no longer be maintained, a more plausible step appeared to be to abandon the idea that agreement with and case of the subject can only be established by moving (part of) the subject. This is exactly what is proposed in Chomsky (1998) where feature movement is dropped completely. The problems with feature movement also hold for Collins™ analysis of Quotative Inversion, as Collins notes on page 61. Thus, although it is clear that the idea of local economy is conceptually very attractive, it remains to be shown that it is empirically superior. Procrastinate Cross-linguistic variation in the timing of V-movement, e.g. overt movement across the adverbial OFTEN in French but covert in English, as in (5), cross-linguis- tic variation in the timing of object movement, e.g. overt movement of the object in Dutch and covert object movement in English, as in (6), and language-internal optionality of object movement, as in (7) have been playing an important role in the development of generative theory of the past ten years. Since both Kitahara and Collins try to handle this type of facts, they can be used as a basis for comparison and evaluation of their proposals. (5) a. Jean embrasse souvent M Marie b. *John kisses often k/44e4 Mary c. *Jean souvent embrasse Marie d. John often kisses Mary French French (6) a. Jan heeft Marie gekust &4&e b. *John has Mary kissed I&4eq c. *Jan heeft gekust Marie Dutch Dutch 152 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 147-15.5 d. John has kissed Mary (7) a. Jon las ekki baekumur Icelandic John read not books b. Jon las baekumur ekki +X&W+W Icelandic John read books not books It is clear why these three phenomena have gained so much attention. The question with respect to (Q-(7) is one of isomorphy again. If Universal Grammar exists, why don™t all languages express a given semantic content in one and the same syntactic way? To explain the cross-linguistic variation in (5) and (6), we need general prin- ciples that allow this amount of variation. The problem with (7) is equally urgent: a central idea of Minimalism is that movement takes place only if necessary. If that is true, optional movement should not exist; in (7) however, it seems that movement of the object across negation is optional in Icelandic. This problem is of the same type as the one involved in Locative Inversion: why move if you can do without. According to Chomsky (1993) the difference in V-timing in (5) can be explained as follows: V-movement is triggered by morphological features, which can be strong or weak. Strong features must be checked and deleted before PF, because they are visible but uninterpretable there. In French, the feature triggering V-movement is strong, yielding overt movement, whereas in English this feature is weak. This explains why V-movement may be postponed until LF in English, but it does not yet explain why V-movement cannot take place overtly in English. To block the possi- bility of overt V-movement in English, Chomsky assumes that a principle called Procrastinate is operative in language, essentially saying that overt movement is more costly than covert movement and hence is to be avoided if possible. Similarly, the different positions of the object in English and Dutch can be explained in terms of a strong feature in Dutch triggering overt object movement and a weak feature in English triggering covert object movement in English (Zwart, 1993). Chomsky™s approach has at least two disadvantages. First, as has been noted by many scholars, it is unclear how to establish whether a particular feature is weak or the strong. Obviously, stating that a feature is strong when it triggers overt move- ment would make the theory circular. Both Kitahara and Collins crucially adopt the strong-weak distinction, which I consider a major weakness of their approaches. A second disadvantage of Chomsky™s approach is that it stipulates that pre and post spell out application of one and the same operation differ in cost. Kitahara therefore seeks to derive Procrastinate from more general principles and appears to be suc- cesful. He proposes that the choice between two equivalent derivations is made on the basis of a condition called the Shortest Derivation Condition: a derivation with fewer steps wins. This requires a way to count steps and a definition of what counts as a single step. The first part of Kitahara™s explanation of different V-timing in French and English runs as before: in French the feature triggering movement is strong, hence movement must be overt, while in English this feature is weak, allow- ing for either overt or covert movement. Now, the obvious move is to claim that covert movement involves fewer operations than overt movement. Kitahara achieves Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 147-155 153 this by assuming (i) that erasure (next to concatenation and replacement) counts as an elementary operation and (ii) that semantic features can be interpreted only once, i.e. in only one position. Overt V-movement and covert V-movement can then be compared as follows (SF = semantic features; PF = phonological features; FF = for- mal features) : (8) a. V[SF, PF, FF] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . V[SF, PF, FF] overt movement ,r Erase SF, Erase PF, Erase FF b. V[FF] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . V[ SF,PF,FF] covert movement ,r I Erase FF Since in covert movement only the formal features move, erasure of semantic fea- tures does not take place. As a result, the number of elementary operations is at least one less in the case of covert movement, thus covert movement of the verb in Eng- lish is favored over overt movement.* This account leads to an elegant explanation of the optionality of overt object shift in Icelandic versus the obligatory covertness of object shift in English. Kitahara shows that in his system overt and covert object movement involve the same num- ber of steps. Therefore, the Shortest Derivation Condition does not distinguish between overt and covert movement, and as expected Icelandic allows both. In this view optionality arises when two derivations are equally costly, i.e. involve an equal number of steps. This looks like a plausible view on optionality. The fact that in English object shift must take place covertly follows from the Minimal Link Condi- tion: overt object shift requires overt V-movement (Holmbergs generalization), but overt V-movement does not take place in English. Although Kitahara™s system leads to elegant solutions, it is questionable on at least four grounds. First, as Kitahara notes in endnote 26 on page 114, the proposed analysis wrongly predicts that French should have optional object shift, since French has overt V-movement. In addition, Dutch (see example 6) may be problematic, since it involves overt object shift, while the main verb seems to remain in situ. Sec- ondly, the assumption that erasure of semantic features is a necessary part of overt movement because semantic features can only be interpreted once is questionable. If certain movement operations take place for reasons of interpretation or to establish information status, which seems quite plausible, then it is crucial that a moved lexi- cal item can be interpreted in more than one position. A third problem, as before, is that Kitahara™s analysis crucially involves feature movement. As Collins notes, a fourth problem for Kitahara™s approach is that it uses global principles: to compare two derivations the number of steps necessary for conver- gence of each derivation are to be compared. Both establishing the number of steps and establishing convergence requires inspection of the resulting LF and PF-config- z Kitahara makes a proviso for erasure of phonological features that need not concern us here. 154 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 147-155 urations. This means that the legitimacy of a particular step cannot be evaluated at the moment in the derivation at which the step is taken. These global properties obviously make the computational system highly complex (cf. Johnson and Lappin, 1997). Collins therefore attempts to eliminate all global conditions in favor of local con- ditions. This seems to me to be the right strategy. A very simple and plausible sys- tem arises if each step in a derivation is locally evaluated. It is clear what such an evaluation should look like: (i) Is this step necessary? (is there a trigger?), and (ii) Is this step possible? (does it not violate any principle?). Although Collins takes the right path, he does not really succeed in abandoning Procrastinate. To account for the obligatory covertness of verb movement in English, as in (5), he proposes that weak features can only be checked by pure features. The notion of pure features is new. Pure features are defined as features that are not part of a lexical item. Since such features can only exist at LF, where they move independently from lexical items, it follows that weak features can only be checked at LF. Apart from the fact that this analysis requires feature movement as well, the assumption that weak fea- tures can only be checked by pure features amounts to stipulating that weak features must be checked at LF. The account for optionality of object shift in Icelandic is equally stipulative: a third type of features is proposed, which are neither strong nor weak such that it does not matter when they are checked. The solution in Chomsky (1995) optional assign- ment of a strong D-feature is not any better. Conclusion It is to be expected that Collins™ idea of local economy is going to be a standard one for some time. Similarly, Kitahara™s account of degrees of deviance of extraction may become important, also because this part of his theory is compatible with local evalu- tion of steps. However, it seems fair to conclude that the problems of optionality and variation in V-timing, central problems in generative research, await a better explana- tion than the ones proposed in these books. New games, i.e. more new and in partic- ular cross-linguistic data are necessary to shed more light on these two problems. As a final point, I would like to complain about the use of endnotes in the LI- monographs. In many of these monographs including the two reviewed here, the endnotes are plentiful and often crucial for a proper evaluation or even understand- ing of the main text. It would be desirable to either integrate the text of the endnotes in the main text or to use footnotes. References Chomsky, N., 1973. Conditions on transformations. In: S.R. Anderson and P. Kiparsky (eds.), A festschrift for Morris Halle, eds. S.R. Anderson and P. Kiparsky, 232-286. New York: Holt. Chomsky, N., 1993. A minimalist program for linguistic theory. In: K. Hale and S.J. Keyser (eds.), The view from Building 20: Essays in linguistics in honor of Sylvain Bromberger, l-52. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press. Book review I Lir+ya 110 (2000) 147-155 15s Chomsky, N., 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1998. Minimalist inquiries: The framework. Manuscript, MIT. Cambridge, MA. D&ken, M. den, 1992. Particles. HIL Dissertation 4, Leiden University. Dikken, M. den, 1995. Binding, expletives and levels. Linguistic inquiry 26, 347-354. Dikken, M. den and A. Naess, 1993. Case dependencies: The case of predicate inversion. Linguistic review 10, 303-336. Fiengo, R., 1977. On trace theory. Linguistic inquiry 8, 35-61, Hoekstra, T. and R. Mulder, 1990. Unergatives as copular verbs: Locational and existential predication. The linguistic review 7, l-79. Johnson D. and S. Lappin, 1997. A critique of the minimalist program. Linguistics and philosophy 20, 273-333. Lasnik, H.. 1992. Case and expletives: Notes toward a parametric account. Linguistic inquiry 23, 381405. Oka, T., 1999. Is local economy minimalist enough? Review of C. Collins: Local economy. Glot inter- national 4(2), 19-21 Pesetsky, D., 1982. Paths and categories. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Pesetsky, D., 1987. Wh-in-situ: Movement and unselective binding. In: E. Reuland and A. ter Meulen (eds.), The representation of (in)definiteness, 98-129. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press. Rizzi, L., 1990. Relativized minimahty. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press. Rochemont. M. and P. Culicover, 1990. English focus constructions and the theory of grammar. Cam- bridge: Cambridge University Press. Zwart, C.J.-W., 1993. Dutch syntax: A minimalist approach. Doctoral dissertation. University of Groningen. 