ELSEVIER Lingua 110(2000)801-806 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Book review Daniel Biiring, The meuning of topic and focus: The 59th street bridge accent. London: Routledge, 1997. Reviewed by Jogo Costa, Dept. Linguistica, Faculdade de Ciencias Sociais e Humanas, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Portugal. Daniel Biiring™s book The meaning of topic and focus: The 59th street bridge accent is a very interesting and important contribution that should be read by anyone interested in working on interface between discourse and grammar. Notions such as topic and focus are often used in the literature. However, many times these terms are used in a very loose way, which makes it difficult for a reader to evaluate proposals considering this type of information. Btiring™s book is very interesting, since it provides clear definitions of what topic and focus mean, based on the behavior of topical and focal information in German. Although he concentrates on the notion of topic, Btiring provides empirical tests, explicit syntactic and semantic definitions for both topic and focus that enable researchers to do further research contemplating this type of discourse information. His main claims are the following: a).Focus is present in all sentences, while Topics may be present or absent. b. Topic and focus are propositional. c. Pragmatics provides the means to define the effects of information structure on the adequacy of sentences. The book is divided in 7 chapters. Chapter 1 and 2 present the goals of the book, as well as the basic aspects assumed by the author regarding German syntax and the type of formal semantics to be adopted. In addition, chapter 2 formalizes the notion of focus, spelling out clearly what is the meaning of this discourse function in the context of the work to be devel- oped. It is emphasized that for a proper treatment of the notions of topic and focus, it is necessary to deal with context. An in-situ theory of focus is adopted, following Jackendoff (1972) and Rooth (1985). For the semantics of focus, the model of Alter- native Semantics is assumed. The complement of focus constitutes the background * E-mail: jcosta@fcsh.unl.pt 037%2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00010-3 802 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 801-806 of the sentence, A review of the intonational pattern associated with focus is also made. Chapter 3 examines the behavior of S(entence)-Topics, such as in the example in (1): (1) [Auf der /NEUNundfiifzigsten Strasselr habe ich dis SCHUE\ gekauft on the 59th street have I the shoes bought ‚On fifty-NINTH street I bought the SHOES.™ Buring observes that (1) may be an answer to a question like (2): (2) What did you buy on 59th street? Based on the observation that topics such as the one marked in (1) have a specific kind of intonation contour, use, and syntactic behavior, the author proposes, like Vallduvi (1990), that, as far as information structure is concerned, a tripartition is needed between topic, focus and background. The topic is basically ‚what the sen- tence is about™, the focus conveys new information, and the background is the part of the sentence which is neither topic nor focus. An interesting aspect of Btiring™s description of the behavior of topics is his observation that topics may be used not only to refer to what the sentence is about, but also to express contrast, to narrow down the referent of a topic previously intro- duced or to express some implication. The rest of the chapter presents an analysis explaining why S-topics can be used in all these contexts. The proposal is that, in for instance question-answer pairs, it is enough to use an alternative to the topic in order to build the set of focus alternatives. In other words, for a sentence to be used, it is not required that its focus value match the discourse topic. It is sufficient that the focus value is a subpart of the discourse topic. Chapter 4, 5 and 6 extend the analysis proposed to other domains in which S-topic intonation is found, and in which there seems to be interference between the value of S-topics and other semantic aspects. Chapter 4 looks at the difference between strong and weak quantifiers. A very interesting result reached is the observation that the lexical ambiguity of weak quan- tifiers may be dispensed with, if their strong readings are just an instance of Topic marking. In short, it is defended that if a weak quantifier receives an S-topic intona- tional marking, it must be inferred that a set of entities denoted by the noun that the quantifier scopes over is a part of the preceding discourse. In other words, for a sequence like Q N in which Q is an S-topic, N must be part of the discourse topic, which forces a strong reading for the quantifier. Chapter 5 looks at possible intonations for structurally ambiguous sentences. It is shown that the bridge contour for sequences like /ALL . . . NOT/ disambiguates, in allowing only the reading in which negation takes wide scope over the quantifier. This is shown to follow from the proposal made in chapter 3 regarding the appropri- ateness conditions and implicatures of S-topics. It is demonstrated that a reading in which the negation takes narrow scope is not compatible with the topic intonation, since there would be nothing left in the set of alternative topics. Bookrevievt~lLingua 110(2000)c101~06 803 Finally, in chapter 6, other cases of S-topic desambiguation are shown to follow from the implicatures associated with topic intonation. In particular, the scope rela- tions between negation and cause and purpose clauses is discussed. It is demon- strated, in the spirit of chapter 5, that some readings are incompatible with topic marking because the discourse topic inferred is incompatible with what is asserted. In chapter 7, a summary of the book is presented. As mentioned before, this book is a very important contribution for the study of topic and focus, since it formalizes the meaning of these terms and offers criteria to pursue research on these subjects. In the remainder of this review, I would like to focus on one aspect of the proposal that seemed to me a bit puzzling, although it does not compromise the results reached in the book. Throughout the book, Btiring assumes the T-model of the grammar, according to which the phonological and the semantic component are separated. Because of this, the author is led to assume that focus and topic are marked in the syntax with fea- tures, as also proposed in the work of Jackendoff ( 1972) and Selkirk (1984), among others. In what follows, I would like to argue that if one allows the prosodic and semantic components to be related without resorting to syntactic topic and focus fea- tures, one may achieve similar results, simplifying matters somewhat. Following Jackendoff (1972) and Selkirk (1984), Biiring assumes that a con- stituent may be marked with a focus feature [F]. Accordingly, this feature may per- colate up the structure yielding focus on any of the categories dominating it. For a sentence like (3), the stress on the direct object may be interpreted as focus on the DP, on VP or on IP: (3) John likes BEANS. a. John likes [Beans],, b. John [likes [Beans]],, c. [John [likes [Beans]]]r,,r A problem for the focus projection approach has to do with the fact that in lan- guages with a more flexible word order focus only projects in unmarked word order. Let us consider a case like Portuguese. As illustrated in (4), SVO and VOS are pos- sible with neutral intonation, which corresponds to stress on the rightmost con- stituent: (4) a. 0 Pedro comeu a sopa. Pedro ate the soup b. Comeu a sopa o Pedro. ate the soup Pedro It is possible to show that, in (4b), the postverbal subject is inside VP (cf. Costa, 1998, 1999). According to the focus projection ‚rule™, any of the sentences in (4) would be a legitimate answer to a question like what happened?, since in both cases the most stressed constituent is inside VP, which enables stress to percolate from the DP to VP and IP. However, only (4a) is a legitimate answer to what happened? or 804 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 801-806 to what did Pedro do?. The only context in which (4b) can be used is as an answer to who ate the soup?. This raises a problem for the focus-projection rule, since it may be shown not to follow from syntax alone. This observation is relevant for determining the way syntax, prosody and dis- course interact. If prosody, syntax and discourse were to act independently, both sen- tences in (4) might serve the same discourse functions, which does not happen. Alternatively, one may question the way these modules interact, and propose a more articulated model. This is crucial for determining the unmarked word order. In chap- ter 1, Btiring spells out his assumptions regarding the unmarked word order of Ger- man. The unmarked word order of a given language is often determined by looking at the surface word order in contexts of sentence-focus, e.g., in answers to what hap- pened?. Following this methodology, one would like to see the unmarked word order being derived from the author™s theory of topic and focus, rather than just assumed. Following Bthing, let us suppose that focus projection is possible whenever a sen- tence-final constituent is stressed. In that case, both (4a) and (4b) should be uttered felicitously in sentence-focus contexts. If syntax, prosody and discourse act indepen- dently, this is the end of the story, and the analysis makes wrong predictions. Note that, in this context, one may not appeal to a special intonation contour as a cue to map the two sentences onto two different discourse contexts, since the intonation of (4a) and (4b) is the same. An alternative solution to this problem is available that may be in the spirit of Btiring™s proposal. Let us assume that VS orders in Portuguese in declarative root contexts are derived by leaving the subject in its base-position, Spec,VP. Looking at the felicitous contexts for the inverted word orders in (5), it is possible to conclude that postverbal subjects are foci (cf. Costa, 1998). (5) a. Comeu o Pedro a sopa. ate Pedro the soup b. Comeu a sopa o Pedro. ate the soup Pedro The only difference between (5a) and (5b) is that the object is also focused in the former, but not in the latter. Considering these facts, it is legitimate to assume that a subject may stay in Spec,VP when it is focused. The only exception for this claim is the sentence-focus context in (4). The reason for focused material to stay low in the structure may be found in prosody. Following Nespor and Vogel (1986) and Cinque (1993), it is possible to observe that the sentence nuclear stress falls on the rightmost constituent. Since focused constituents need to be stressed, it is necessary that they surface in the rightmost position. Moving the subject to Spec,IP in (5) would make it impossible for the subject to stay in a position where it is assigned main stress.™ ™ Matters are more complicated for the case of the intonation of VSO sentences. See Costa (1998, in preparation) for discussion. Book review I Lingua 110 (2000,l801-806 805 What may be retained from this solution is that prosody and the consequent dis- course interpretation are crucial for determining the word order found. Let us now consider the case of sentence-focus. In this context, all elements are focused. Any constituent may stay in sentence-final position, as long as stress falls on this posi- tion. Comparing the several possible sentences, SVO will be the preferred one, because the subject may reach the Case position, Spec,IP.2 The implication of this analysis is that syntax, prosody and discourse must interact at one single level. In contexts in which not all the elements of the sentence are focused, the prosody will determine the word order. When all the elements of the sentence are focused, all word orders will equally satisfy prosodic requirements, which enables syntax to be the crucial factor for determining the emerging word order. If prosody would just read a syntactic feature [focus] and assign it a specific intonation contour, the pre- diction would be that prosody alone would be enough for determining the discourse functions. In other words, one might find a rigid word order with different intonation contours for each possibility. In the case of sentence-focus, the prediction would be that all possible word orders would be felicitous. Let us now establish the link between these observations and Btiring™s work. In the final chapters of the book, Biiring presents several examples of contexts in which a given prosodic contour disambiguates structurally ambiguous sentences. Under his interpretation of the facts, the prosodic contour provides a clue for what discourse feature ([topic] or [focus]) is associated in the syntax with each constituent. How- ever, the observation of a language with a more flexible word order shows that there is no need to postulate the existence of such syntactic features. In fact, an autonomous syntactic marking mapped onto prosody makes wrong predictions. My suggestion is the following: one can reinterpret Btiring™s results by allowing the semantic and the prosodic component to be directly related. Let us take, for instances, the case of weak quantifiers. As Bi.iring shows, when a weak quantifier receives the S-topic accent, it gets a strong reading. If the semantics is able to read this intonational contour, the computation of the strong reading of the quantifier may proceed as proposed by Btiring without further stipulations concerning the syntactic component. One advantage of the view defended here on the interaction between prosody, syntax and discourse is that Btiring™s most interesting analysis and definitions of topic and focus can be maintained. Moreover, it becomes possible to use his results in the study of languages with a different syntax, in particular, languages in which different word orders reflect different discourse functions. I think this type of result is desirable, since, as mentioned above, the results of this book must be taken into account by anyone interested on syntax-prosody-discourse interfaces. ? The procedure of selecting the best word order is formalized within Optimality Theory in Costa (1998). 806 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 801-806 References Cinque, Guglielmo, 1993. A null theory of phrase and compound stress. Linguistic Inquiry 24, 239-297. Costa, Joao, 1998. Word order variation: A constraint-based approach. Ph.D. dissertation, HIL/Leiden University. Costa, Joao, 1999. VOS in Portuguese: Arguments against an analysis in terms of remnant movement. To appear in: A. Alexiadou and S. Barbiers (eds.), Remnant Movement, F-movement and the T- model. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Costa, Joao, in preparation. VSO vs. SVO: A case of convergence between syntax, semantics and prosody. Ms., Universidade Nova de Lisboa. Jackendoff, Ray, 1972. Semantic interpretation in generative grammar.Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Nespor, Marina and Irene Vogel, 1986. Prosodic phonology. Dordrech: Foris. Rooth, Mats, 1985. Association with focus. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Massachusetts at Amherst. Selkirk, Lisa, 1984. Phonology and syntax: The relation between sound and structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Vallduvi, Emit, 1990. The informational component. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania. 