ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 On the syntax of possessor extraction* Elena Gavruseva* Linguistics Department, University of Iowa, EPB 5.51, low~a City, IA 52242, USA Received 30 June 1999; revised version 28 February 2000 Abstract This paper investigates the structure of wh-possessive phrases and the constraints on extraction of wh-possessors across several languages, with a special focus on the differences between the Germanic languages (English, Dutch, German, etc.) and Hungarian, Tzotzil, and Chamorro. The main objective is to provide a parametric account for the crosslinguistic vari- ation in extraction of prenominal DP possessors. The cornerstone of the proposal is the idea that the syntax of possessor extraction parallels the syntax of subject extraction in that pos- sessors are required to extract in two steps (Szabolcsi, 1983/1994, 1994). The first step of possessor movement involves the checking of case and phi-features in the domain of Agr/D. The second step consists in moving to an escape hatch position, SpecDP. It is argued that in languages with overt wh-movement both steps need to take place in overt syntax for posses- sor extraction to be grammatical. It is shown that this is the case in languages such as Hun- garian, Tzotzil, and Chamorro. Conversely, it is proposed that in Germanic, possessor move- ment to SpecDP is delayed until LF, therefore prenominal possessors cannot extract. The differences in ‚timing™ of possessor movement are argued to reside in the ‚strength™ of the Q- feature associated with the category D, a nominal complementizer, whose properties are par- allel to those of the clausal Comp. 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Parametric variation; Wh-possessive phrases; Possessor extraction; Possessor movement; Syntactic constraints; Feature-checking; Structure of DP 1. Introduction The term possessor extraction is used to describe the constructions in which a nominal or a prepositional possessor phrase is separated from the possessed noun by * I would like to thank Raffaella Zanuttini and Paul Portner for discussing earlier versions of this paper with me. Special thanks to an anonymous reviewer whose insightful comments have much improved many aspects of this paper. The remaining mistakes are all my own. * Phone: +1 319 339 1847; Fax: +l 319 339 3971: E-mail: elena-gavruseva@uiowa.edu 0378.2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00015-2 144 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 A-bar movement. The examples in (l-2) drawn from Hungarian and Italian show the surface form of non-wh and wh-possessives and illustrate possessor extraction from the object position: (1) Extraction of prenominal possessor in Hungarian (from Szabolcsi 198311984): a. Mari-nak a vendeg-e-o Mary-Dat the guest-poss.3sg ‚Mary™s guest™ b. Ki-nek a vendeg-e-o who-Dat the guest-poss.3sg ‚Whose guest? ™ c. [ki-nek], ismer-te-tek [or tk a vendegd-o-t] ? who-Dat know-past.2pl the guest-poss.3sg.Acc ‚Whose guest did you know? ™ (2) Extraction of prepositional possessor in Italian: a. il bambino di Gianni the child of Gianni ‚Gianni™s child™ b. il bambino di qui the child of who ‚Whose child? ™ c. [Di chilk ha visto [or il bambino tk ]? of who has (he) seen the child ‚Whose child has he seen?™ Ross (1986) noted that the data such as in (l-2) stand in contrast with the data from the Germanic languages, which generally prohibit extraction of prenominal possessors out of NP.™ Consider the examples in (3-5):2 (3) a. Whose brother did you meet? b. *Whose, did you meet [or tk brother]? C. *Who, did you meet [or tk ‚s brother]? ™ The NP notation is used to refer to a nominal syntactic category. Wherever it is of relevance that a noun phrase has a DP status, I refer to it as a DP. * In this article, I focus primarily on the crosslinguistic differences in extraction of prenominal DP pos- sessors. It is a well-known fact that extraction of PP possessors is allowed in Germanic, with some inter- esting definiteness restrictions. The examples below illustrate possessor extraction with preposition stranding in English: (i) a. Who did you see a picture of? b. *Who did you see the picture of? Although I do not examine the definiteness effects in extraction out of NP in Germanic, I do address some other extraction properties of PP possessors on the basis of Italian and German data. The discus- sion of PP possessors is meant to clarify the typological differences between languages and to solidify the central claims of this article. (4) a. b. (5) a. b. E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 Hvers mddur hittir Pu? (Icelandic, from Webelhuth 1992) whose mother met you ‚Whose mother did you meet? ™ *Hvers, hittir [or tk m&ur] Pu? whose met mother you Wessen Buch hast du gelesen? (German) ‚Whose book have you read™ *Wessenk hast du [or tk Buch] gelesen? whose have you book read 145 To account for the crosslinguistic variation in (l--5), Ross devised a Left-Branch Condition (LBC) formulated as follows: (6) Left-Branch Condition No NP which is the leftmost constituent of a larger NP can be reordered out of this NP by a transformational rule. The theoretical inadequacy of the Left-Branch Condition has long been recog- nized in the literature (Grosu, 1974; Corver, 1990), especially given the fact that there exist the so-called mixed languages (e.g. German), where extraction patterns vary by the syntactic category of the possessor (DP vs. PP) and by the syntactic posi- tion of the possessor in the NP. The complexity of data sets and intra-language idio- syncrasies in extraction patterns present a challenge for parametric accounts of pos- sessor extraction. In view of these difficulties, Grosu (1974) even suggests that there may be no single parameter that could capture the existing variability. In this article, I examine the syntax of wh-possessive phrases across several lan- guages in an attempt to derive a set of syntactic constraints that determine extractability of possessor phrases in a language with overt wh-movement. The data subject to an analysis are drawn from the Germanic group of languages (English, Dutch, German, and some others) as well as from Hungarian, Tzotzil, Chamorro, and Italian. All these languages have overt wh-movement. The data set examined suggests a three-way division between languages as far as the extractability status of prenominal possessor phrases is concerned: 3 (7) Three-way split between languages: Type A: Obligatory extraction (e.g. Chamorro) Type B: Optional extraction (e.g. Hungarian, Tzotzil) Type C: No extraction (e.g. English, German, Dutch) As is well known, possessor phrases may be of various syntactic categories (Determiner Phrases, Adjectival Phrases, and Prepositional Phrases) and may occupy ™ I will show in the course of the discussion that German has a mixed status with respect to possessor extraction. It is generally not possible to extract a prenominal Genitive or Dative possessor in German. However, extraction of prepositional possessor phrases is allowed. As I point out, the three-way split in (7) holds for prenominal possessor phrases across the examined languages. 746 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 various syntactic positions within the NP (specifiers, adjuncts, complements). Thus, my initial working hypothesis is that the constraints on extractability of possessors will vary according to their syntactic category and syntactic position. The analysis of the data will therefore be taken in two steps. First, I take a look at extraction patterns of prenominal possessors analyzed as DP specifiers of the possessed noun. Second, I examine extraction of prepositional possessors on the basis of German and Italian data. A comparative study of several languages will allow me to identify the scope and limits of parametric variability. As a result of the investigation, I will single out two generalizations which I will further scrutinize for more abstract principles. I will suggest that these principles give rise to the three-way split between the languages presented in (7). A note on the theory and assumptions is in order here. Throughout the paper, I will present and discuss the syntactic analyses formulated within the Principles and Parameters framework (Chomsky, 1981, 1986). While I keep some fundamental insights from the theory of Principles and Parameters (the X-bar theory, for exam- ple), I adopt an approach to movement operations as outlined in the Minimalist Pro- gram (Chomsky, 1995); in particular, a suggestion that movement is driven by the need to check interpretable and uninterpretable features. Thus, I cannot but offer some reanalyses of the data I present, using the more recent insights into the nature of syntactic computations. Since the paper is concerned with the issue of parametric variability, I adopt Chomsky™s (1989) position that parametric differences reside in the functional domain of the syntactic structure. On the Minimalist approach, the functional domain is associated with interpretable and uninterpretable formal fea- tures that vary in strength (‚strong™ vs. ‚weak™). Thus, I assume that that the clue to parametric differences in possessor extraction needs to be sought in the functional domain of nominal structure, more precisely, in the types and relative strength of formal features associated with the category D. Building on the work of Cinque (1980), Giorgi and Longobardi (1991), Stowell (1989) and Szabolcsi (1983/1984, 1994), I propose that extraction of wh-possessors is possible in a language if possessors extract through SpecDP, an escape hatch posi- tion, which is taken to be similar in its properties to the clausal CP. I argue that one of the properties shared by the heads of the DP and CP is the ability to be endowed with an uninterpretable Q-feature. The ‚strengh™ of the Q-feature determines the level at which possessor movement to SpecDP takes place. It is shown that in lan- guages like Hungarian, Tzotzil, and Chamorro, possessors move to SpecDP in overt syntax due to a ‚strong™ value of the Q-feature. This property is argued to be respon- sible for licensing possessor extraction in languages with overt wh-movement. An examination of the data in Germanic shows that prenominal possessors move overtly only to an A-position, where they check structural case and phi-features of the nom- inal Agr/D.4 The necessary step of possessor movement through SpecDP is delayed until LF due to the ‚weak™ nature of the Q-feature on D in Germanic. Thus, the para- meterized values of the Q-feature (‚strong™ vs. ‚weak™) determine the extractability 4 I use the AgriD notation to refer to a functional domain within the NP, where case and agreement fea- tures get checked. E. Gavruseva / Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 741 status of a possessor phrase. In addition, it is shown that the ‚strength™ values of Q interact in a subtle way with the case and phi-feature content of the lower projection, which I call Agr/DP in this paper. The article is organized as follows. In section 2, I review the research into the constraints on extraction out of NP and briefly discuss why the existing accounts for- mulated to explain the parametric variation in (1-S) are inadequate. Section 3 com- pares extraction of prenominal DP possessors in Germanic languages and in lan- guages like Hungarian, Tzotzil, Chamorro. Section 4 shows how the data discussed can be given a Minimalist treatment. This section also proposes a Minimalist account of the parametric variation in (l-5). In section 5, I examine the morphosyn- tactic properties of Germanic possessives and explain why possessor extraction is disallowed. Section 6 considers extraction of PP possessors in Italian as outlined in the research of Cinque (1980) and Giorgi and Longobardi (1991). This section also extends Giorgi and Longobardi™s analytical framework to German. The conclusions are reported in Section 7. 2. Theoretical background There have been various attempts in the syntactic literature to account for the crosslinguistic variation in (l-5). Some of the earlier approaches to extraction out of NP attempted to reduce the parametric differences to single syntactic conditions such as the Left-Branch Condition (Ross, 1986), a Condition on Extraction Domain (Huang, 1982), the Specificity Condition (Chomsky, 1973, Fiengo and Higgin- botham, 1981) or general constraints on wh-movement such as the Empty Category Principle (Chomsky, 1986, Rizzi, 1990). However, the ECP cannot explain the dif- ferences between (l-2) and (3-5). In both sets of data, possessors are extracted from the V-complement position, as shown in (8): (8) [v [or t D . . . ]] (word order irrelevant) The ECP predicts that extraction from the object position should be grammatical, since a [+V] governor can presumably license a wh-trace in the specifier of DP. As was shown above, this prediction is not borne out by the Germanic data. This sug- gests that the condition on proper government cannot be solely responsible for licensing extraction out of DP. Therefore, some other syntactic conditions are likely to be involved in determining the crosslinguistic variation.5 s The approaches along the ECP lines assumed a ‚truncated™ structure for possessive phrases that con- tained only one functional head D whose specifier was the target of possessor movement, as shown in (8) above. Conceivably, an ECP account could work if one follows Szabolcsi™s (1983/1984) and Kayne™s (1993) analysis of possessives which posits an expanded DP structure as in (i): (i) [DP [Agr/DP [NP 111 It could be argued that possessors in Germanic move only to the Spec of Agr/DP and are unable to move to a higher Spec of the DP. Hence, the head of the DP prevents head-government by V into SpecAgr/DP by Minimality. This approach lacks in explanatory adequacy because it does not provide an explanation for why possessor phrases are prevented from moving into SpecDP in Germanic. 748 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 One line of syntactic research suggests that certain interpretive aspects of noun phrases (for example, specificity) may interact with the ECP or Subjacency in deter- mining extraction possibilities out of NP (Diesing, 1992, Mahajan, 1992, Stowell, 1989). On Mahajan™s (1992) approach to extraction, the Germanic data could be explained if the specificity of the DP somehow made it impossible to license a pos- sessor trace in SpecDP. Mahajan suggests that specific object DPs move to the Spec of ArgOP, an ungoverned position, to check their case. Thus, wh-extraction from SpecAgrOP violates the ECP. Mahajan notes (in footnote 7), that the specificity effects may not hold in V-final languages (e.g. Hindi, Hungarian), hence the extrac- tion of the Hungarian wh-possessor ki-nek in example (1) is licit, despite the fact that the overt determiner a(z) (‚the™) renders the DP specific. I will show in section 6.1 that Mahajan™s proposal does not extend to Italian, an SVO language, where prepo- sitional possessor phrases are allowed to extract from the specific DP. Other researchers argue that extraction out of NP is determined by the DP/NP distinction in the syntactic status of noun phrases and Subjacency or ECP (Bowers, 1988, Corver, 1990). Corver (1990), in particular, examines the differences in extraction patterns out of NP between the Germanic and Slavic languages. He sug- gests that the differences follow from the interaction of the ECP, the syntactic status of noun phrases (DPs in Germanic vs. NPs in Slavic), and the case assignment mechanism.6 Corver stipulates that structural case can block antecedent-government if it is assigned to a DP as opposed to a NP argument. On the other hand, Uriagereka (1988) proposes that the locus of the parametric differences in extraction out of DP resides in the morphological status of the D head. The gist of his proposal is that the morphological status of D (null vs. overt) determines the ‚richness™ of D in a lan- guage: the ‚richer™ the D is, the more of a barrier it evokes. Presumably, D is ‚richer™ in languages where it is morphologically lexicalized than in languages where it is null. Thus, Uriagereka derives a correlation between the ‚richness™ of D and the possibility of wh-extraction out of the DP. While the correlation certainly holds for Russian, Tzotzil, Chamorro, and the Germanic languages, it fails to do so for Hungarian. Notice that neither Corver™s, nor Uriagereka™s proposals explain the Hungarian data. Just like in Germanic, the possessives in Hungarian project to DP and receive structural case (Szabolcsi, 1994). However, contrary to Corver, case does not block antecedent government into the DP. Uriagereka™s reasoning predicts that the deter- miner a(z) (‚the™) in Hungarian possessives should count as ‚rich™ and evoke a bar- rier, since it is morphologically overt. This prediction is not borne out. The Hun- garian facts suggest that the DP-hood and the morphological status of D alone do not predict what extraction options are permitted in a language. In this connection, a pertinent question is what other properties of DPs would predict extraction and what properties would predict a lack of it. This question is addressed in subsequent sections. 6 Carver (1990) adopts Chomsky™s (1986) definition of ECP as antecedent-government. E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 149 3. Extraction of DP possessors in Hungarian, Tzotzil, and Chamorro The main contrast under consideration in this section is the data from Hungarian, Tzotzil, Chamorro on the one hand, and the Germanic languages (English, German, and Dutch) on the other. In all these languages, prenominal possessors are analyzed as DPs undergoing DP-internal movement. The empirical question of interest is what properties of possessives constrain the extractability of DP specifiers. In tackling this question, I first focus on the [+extraction] languages such as Hungarian, Tzotzil, Chamorro. The subsections to follow have a similar organizational format. I begin by discussing the structure of possessive phrases, focusing on case and agreement relations in the DP and the evidence for possessor movement to an escape hatch position. Next, I proceed to discuss possessor extraction patterns. 3.1. Possessor extraction in Hungarian: The DP=CP hypothesis I begin by discussing the details of Szabolcsi™s (1983/1984, 1994) analysis of Hungarian, since much of what I will claim about extractability of DP possessors relies on her proposal that I refer to as the DP=CP Hypothesis. Szabolcsi™s funda- mental insight is that the syntax of possessor extraction in Hungarian and the syntax of subject extraction in languages like English are remarkably similar. An important contrast that Szabolcsi uses to illustrate her point is the difference in extraction pos- sibilities between Nominative and Dative possessors. Examples in (9) show that there are two types of possessive constructions in Hungarian. The possessor NP can surface either in the Nominative or in the Dative case: (9) a. b. (a) Mari-o vendeg-e-o the Mari-Nom guest-poss.3sg ‚Mary™s guest™ Mari-nak a vendeg-e-o Mary-Dat the guest-poss.3sg ‚Mary™s guest™ Both types of possessor phrases trigger agreement in person and number features, which is morphologically expressed in the form of an affix on the possessed NP. The case on the possessor determines its position with respect to the determiner a(z) (‚the™), which consistently appears in all possessive structures. Nominative posses- sors follow a(z), while Dative possessors precede it. Szabolcsi takes this distribu- tional difference as evidence for possessor movement within the DP (over the deter- miner a(z)) in Dative constructions. Thus, she argues that the structures in (9) share an underlying representation, as shown in (1O):7 7 In her 1983/1984 analysis, Szabolcsi argues that the possessive morpheme on the possessed noun projects AgrP in the phrase structure. In section 4, I will adopt this earlier version of Szabolcsi™s analy- sis. For expository purposes, I present a 1994 version here. 750 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 (10) A Spec A D (N+I)P DP (N+I)™ N+I (a) Mari-o Mari-nakk tk vendeg-e-o Szabolcsi (1994) suggests that the N+I amalgam containing the possessive mor- pheme assigns Nominative case to the possessor in its specifier. The structure in (10) shows that the possessor DP Mm-i-@ is base-generated in Spec(N+I)P, where it receives Nominative case from the nominal inflectional complex represented as N+I. Dative possessors, on the other hand, move to SpecDP, where they receive Dative case from D lexicalized as a(z) (‚the™). Szabolcsi points out an interesting distributional difference between Nominative and Dative possessors: Nominative possessors are not allowed in wh-constructions. Consider the contrasts in (11): (11) a. *a ki-@ vendeg-e-o the who-Nom guest-poss.3sg ‚whose guest? ™ b. ki-nek a vendeg-e-o who-Dat the guest-poss.3sg ‚whose guest?™ Szabolcsi takes the ungrammaticality of (1 la) to indicate that wh-possessors are required to move to the SpecDP position. By contrast, lexical possessor phrases move to SpecDP optionally. A further difference between Nominative and Dative structures relates to extrac- tion possibilities. Only Dative possessors are allowed to extract. Extraction of wh- possessors was illustrated in example (1). Consider here examples in (12) that illus- trate extraction of a lexical possessor P&et--nek in topic-focus sentences (T stands for Topic and F stands for Focus; Szabolcsi, 1994: 205): (12) a. b. [T Pe™ter-nek], csak [F Mari] latta [or tk a kalap-j&t] Peter-Dat only Mari saw the hat-poss.3sg.Acc ‚As for Peter, only Mari saw his hat.™ *[TPeter-@]k csak Mari latta [or tk a kalap-j&t] Peter-Nom only Mari saw the hat E. Gavruseva I Lingua II0 (2000) 743-772 751 Szabolcsi accounts for the contrasts in (12) by proposing that possessor-DPs can extract only if they first move to SpecDP, a peripheral specifier position of the defi- nite determiner a(z). Szabolcsi claims that movement to SpecDP is facilitated by the need to turn D into a proper governor for the possessor trace in Spec(N+I)P. By assumption, D is inert for government unless it is rendered an active governor through Spec-Head agreement with a DP constituent in its specifier. The impossibil- ity of extracting Nominative possessor-DPs that sit in the Spec of (N+I)P receives a straightforward explanation: an inert D is unable to govern the possessor trace and by Minimality prevents outside head-government by a lexical [VI. Since possessor movement to SpecDP is a required step that precedes subsequent extraction out of DP, Szabolcsi suggests that possessor extraction is akin to subject extraction in English, which also obligatorily proceeds through the peripheral posi- tion, SpecCP. Hence, the DP=CP parallel. It is worthwhile to point out that Szabolcsi (1994) speculates on the crosslinguistic variability in possessor movement to SpecDP. She notes that the properties of the D head, in particular, its ability to bear abstract agreement features are likely to be responsible for the lack of possessor movement in some languages: ﬁMost languages do not exhibit possessor extraction, they typically lack even the first step of movement. In case the structure of their noun phrases is by and large similar to the one I assume for Hungarian, Rizzi™s theory offers two basic options to explain the absence of possessor movement. One is that the possessor is unable to trigger specifier-head agreement with D (for instance, because it is not a plain noun phrase), the other is that D cannot even carry abstract agreement features. I have no account for why the requisite agreement relation is such a rare phenomenon.ﬂ (Szabolcsi, 1994: 205) In section 4, I will develop an account of crosslinguistic variation in possessor move- ment to SpecDP that builds on Szabolcsi™s DP=CP proposal. 3.2. Possessor extraction in Tzotzil In this section, I consider possessive constructions in Tzotzil, an Austronesian language studied by Aissen (1996). Two properties of possessives in Tzotzil make them similar to their Hungarian counterparts: (a) agreement relations in the DP: just like in Hungarian, possessor and possessed nouns agree in person and number fea- tures; (b) wh-possessors obligatorily move to SpecDP prior to extraction out of the DP. Aissen (1996) shows that lexical and wh-possessors are in complementary distri- bution in Tzotzil. Lexical possessors follow the possessed noun and are not allowed to appear in prenominal position, as shown in ( 13):8 (13) a. s-p™in li Maruch-e A3-pot the Maruch-ENC ‚Maruch™s pot™ * The notation A1/2/3 indicates Set A affixes: 1st. 2nd and 3rd person. The notation ENC indicates an enclitic. 152 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 b. *[li Maruch] s-p™in [t]....-e the Maruch A3-pot....ENC ‚Maruch™s pot™ Conversely, the wh-possessor buch™u (‚who™) consistently surfaces in pre-nominal position. The contrasts in (14) below show that leaving a wh-possessor in post-nom- inal position gives rise to ungrammaticality: (14) a. b. buch™u x-ch™amal who A3-child ‚whose child? ™ *x-ch™amal buch ‚u A3-child who ‚whose child? ™ Aissen suggests that the constructions in (13-14) have a similar underlying repre- sentation: both lexical and wh-possessors are base-generated in the specifier of the possessed noun, which is projected on the right edge in Tzotzil. Subsequently, wh- possessors obligatorily move to SpecDP, a position projected to the left of the D head, which is obligatorily null in wh-possessives. This is diagramed in (15) (from Aissen, 1996: 458): (1% DP buch™uk NP x-ch™amal Turning to extraction options, Aissen notes that lexical and wh-possessors differ in extraction possibilities out of the DP: only wh-possessors are allowed to extract. To account for this asymmetry, Aissen proposes that possessors must extract via the Spec of DP. She further suggests that SpecDP is an A-bar position, since only wh- elements are allowed to move there. The examples in (16) illustrate optional extrac- tion of buch™u from the object position: (16) a. b. [Buch ‚u]k av-il-be [or ‚tk s-tot tk]? who AZsee-IO A3-father ‚Whose father did you see? ™ [DP Buch™u s-totlk av-il-be [tk]? who A3-father A2-see-10 ‚Whose father did you see? ™ E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 753 Aissen points out that extraction of buch™u cannot take place from the subject position. Examples in (17) illustrate that pied-piping of a wh-possessive phrase is obligatory in subject questions : (17) a. [or Buch™u x-ch™amal], y-elk™an chij [tJ? who A3-child A3-steal sheep ‚Whose child stole sheep? ™ b. *[Buch-u], y-elk™an chij [or ‚tk x-ch™amal fJ? who A3-steal sheep A3 child ‚Whose child stole sheep?™ In accounting for the subject/object asymmetry in possessor extraction in Tzotzil, Aissen adopts Cinque™s (1990) definition of a barrier as a category not directly selected by a [+V] governor. Under this definition, wh-possessives in subject posi- tions are islands for extraction, since SpecDP cannot be properly governed.™ By con- trast, government of SpecDP by V is always possible in object questions. To sum up at this point, the distributional differences between lexical and wh-pos- sessors in both Tzotzil and Hungarian suggest that wh-possessors undergo move- ment to SpecDP. Aissen and Szabolcsi™s analyses converge in proposing that move- ment to SpecDP is an obligatory step in possessor extraction out of the DP. In the next section, I consider possessor extraction in Chamorro. 3.3. Possessor extraction in Chamorro The discussion of the Chamorro facts will be based on the work of Chung (1991). Chung demonstrates that possessors in Chamorro occur in a postnominal position, as shown in (18): (18) a. i kumpliafios-iia i Impiradot the birthday-3sg. the emperor ‚the Emperor™s birthday™ b. i biskleta-nfiiha i famagu™un the bicycle-3pl. the children ‚the children™s bicycle™ In (18), the possessed noun bears an affix which indicates agreement in person and number with the possessor. In this respect, possessive phrases in Chamorro are similar to those in Hungarian and Tzotzil. Chung takes the definite determiner i (‚the™) which precedes the possessed NP to be the head of the DP/poss. Consider the diagram in ( 19): 9 Aissen follows the formulation of the ECP in Lasnik and Saito (1992: ch. 3) in which proper gov- ernment is defined as lexical government by a c-commanding head or antecedent-government. E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 754 (19) A DP i Impiraddt (‚the Emperor™) D NP i kumpliafios-fia the birthday-3sg. (19) shows that D takes the possessed NP as its complement, whereas the posses- sor is base-generated in its specifier. lo Chung (1991: 93) suggests that the affix on the possessed NP should be treated as a morphological spell-out of features associ- ated with D, specifically, ﬁthe features resulting from the specifier-head agreement between D and the possessorﬂ. (In section 4, I will offer a reanalysis of Chamorro possessives.) As for possessor extraction, Chung notes that its acceptability depends on the sta- tus of D: possessors can extract out of the DP only if D is null. Possessor extraction is ungrammatical if D is lexicalized as i (‚the™). Consider the contrasts in (20-21) showing extraction of the wh-possessor huyi (‚who™): (20) Extraction from subject position: a. [Huyi], ti man-maguf [or 0 famagon-fia tk ]? who not Infl(p)-happy children-Agr(3sg) ‚Whose children are unhappy? ™ b. *[Hayi], ti man-maguf [or i famagon-fia tk] ? who not Infl(p)-happy the children-Agr(3sg) (21) Extraction from object position: a. [Huyi], un-yuland [or B munika-fia tk]? who Infl(2c)-break doll-Agr(3sg) ‚Whose doll did you break? ™ b. *[Hayilk un-yuland [DP i munika-fia tk]? who Infl(2c)-break the doll-Agr(3sg) In view of the data in (20-21), Chung discusses why possessor extraction is dis- allowed when D is lexicalized as i (‚the™). Chung argues that the answer to this ques- tion lies in the mechanism that licenses traces of moved constituents inside the DP. She proposes that only external governors can license these traces because possessor lo Chung also considers an alternative analysis on which possessor phrases could be analyzed as com- plements of the head of the possessed NP. In arguing against such an analysis, Chung observes that Chamorro nominals which function as complements of N heads always occur in the oblique case. A dis- tinguishing characteristic of possessor phrases realized by lexical or wh-elements is that they bear no overt morphological case-markings and occur in the so-called ‚unmarked case™. Since there is no mor- phological evidence that possessors are marked for the oblique case, Chung concludes that they are base- generated in SpecDP. E. Gavruseva i Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 755 extraction (even when D is null) is ungrammatical in certain configurations. One such configuration is shown in (22), where huyi is extracted from the DP which serves as a complement of a prepositional head: (22) *[Hayi], plra un-hanao [rp pka [nP guma™-fia tk]]? who Fut Infl(2sg)-go to house-Agr( 3sg) ‚Whose house will you go to? ™ Based on (22) Chung concludes that a null D is not a sufficient governor for pos- sessor traces, whereas other heads such as V and Infl (but not P) are. In this way, Chung accounts for the lack of subject/object asymmetry in possessor extraction. Another conclusion that Chung arrives at is that outside government of possessor traces does not hold if D is phonologically overt (i.e. lexicalized as i). Thus, Chung proposes that an overt D prevents external head government. It is noteworthy that Chung takes the null/overt alternations in D to be parallel to the null/overt altema- tions in the English intermediate Comp. Following Rizzi (1990) Chung draws a par- allel between the null Comp in English which can be realized as Agr and the null D in Chamorro, which, she claims, can also be realized as Agr. Notice, however, that Chung does not pursue a subject extraction analogy while discussing possessor extraction facts, since on her analysis, possessor phrases are extracted directly from SpecDP. Another interesting finding that emerges from Chung™s (1991) discussion is that possessor extraction is obligatory when D is realized as a null determiner. Chung (p.c.) confirms that this is indeed so: her informants did not volunteer sentences where a wh-possessive phrase was pied-piped. To rule out pied-piping, Chung (1991) suggests that a [+wh] matrix Comp is not a proper governor, hence sentences as in (23) are ungrammatical: (23) *Hayi, [DP asagua-fia t,lk ma™a™fiao-mu [tk]? who spouse-Agr(3sg) afraid-Agr(2sg) ‚Whose wife are you afraid of? ™ (23) shows pied-piping of the possessive DP to SpecCP. From there, huyi further extracts leaving a trace in SpecDP. This trace cannot be licensed by a [+wh] Comp. 4. A minimalist analysis of [+extraction] languages In this section, I highlight the properties that the possessive constructions in Hun- garian, Chamorro and Tzotzil share and discuss how the extraction data in these lan- guages can be given a uniform treatment in light of a Minimalist approach to syn- tactic movement (Chomsky, 1995). The analysis that I suggest will form a basis for my account of parametric differences in possessor extraction between these lan- guages and the languages from the Germanic group. 156 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 4.1. Syntactic movement in the minimalist framework In Minimalism, syntactic movement is viewed as a feature-driven operation, moti- vated by the need to check the formal features (FF) of the attracting functional heads (Comp, T, light v, D) and lexical items (LI). There are two kinds of formal features that can be associated with a syntactic category (functional or lexical): [-inter- pretable] features such as phi-features, Case features, ‚strong™/‚weak™ categorial fea- tures and [+interpretable] features such as categorial features and phi-features of nominals (Chomsky, 1995: 277). According to Chomsky (1995), the ‚strength™ of uninterpretable categorial features determines whether feature-checking takes place in the overt or covert component of the computational system (i.e. before or after Spell-Out). If a head H bears a ‚strong™ categorial F, syntactic movement takes place in overt syntax. Conversely, if H bears a ‚weak™ feature, movement is postponed until LF. Chomsky also observes that phi-features are likely to be overtly manifested (i.e. have some morphological reflex) when feature-checking is overt (1995: 277). It follows from the checking theory of movement that the parametric variability resides in the types and relative ‚strength™ of features that can be associated with functional heads or lexical items. In other words, crosslinguistic differences stem from the dif- ferences in ‚timing™ of feature checking operations. In subsequent sections, I re-examine possessor extraction in Hungarian, Tzotzil, and Chamorro in the spirit of Minimalist ideas. 4.2. Possessor extraction in the minimalist framework This section addresses the following question: What feature-checking operations facilitate possessor movement in the DP in [+extraction] languages? The answer that I suggest will bear directly on the main issue concerning the properties of possessive DPs that license possessor extraction. To begin with, I adopt Szabolcsi™s (1983/1984) original proposal that an inflec- tional affix on the possessed NP in Hungarian projects a nominal Infl (Infl/poss). Here I will use the label Agr/D to refer to a functional domain where case and agree- ment features are checked. In the Minimalist framework, inflections are not taken to project separate functional heads, rather inflectional morphemes correspond to abstract grammatical features that are checked by lexical items with ‚matching™ fea- tures via syntactic movement. The lexical items themselves are inserted fully inflected into the syntax. On this approach, it is not too difficult to see how feature- checking works in [+extraction] languages. Recall that Chamorro, Tzotzil, and Hungarian possessive phrases display the so- called ‚possessor agreement™ in person and number, which is overtly manifested in the form of an affix on the possessed noun. For convenience, I illustrate possessor agreement in (24) : (24) a. ki-nek a vendeg-e-o (Hungarian) who-Dat the guest-poss.3sg.Nom ‚whose guest? ™ E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 751 b. hayi munika-fia (Chamorro) who doll-3sg ‚whose doll? ™ c. buch™u s-tot (Tzotzil) who 3sg-father ‚whose father? ™ The morphological properties of the constructions in (24) suggest that the Agr/D heads in these languages share a set of phi-features, namely, [+person] and [+num- ber]. Since these phi-features are [-interpretable], they need to be checked by the matching [+interpretable] features associated with the possessed NP. I suggest that the checking is done via head adjunction of the possessed N to Agr/D in overt syn- tax. As suggested in Chomsky (1995), overt syntactic movement should have a mor- phological reflex. This is exactly what is found in the respective languages. Furthermore, I suggest that Agr/D in (24) also bears an uninterpretable case fea- ture: Nominative in Tzotzil and Chamorro and possibly in Hungarian. (I will suggest in section 4.2 below that the morpheme -nek may not be a Dative case affix in extraction structures.) In Chomsky™s framework. case is intrinsically a [-inter- pretable] feature, regardless of whether it is borne by a functional or lexical category. Thus, I suggest that the case feature is checked via raising of the possessor NP to the Spec of Agr/D. This re-analysis of the data in (24) entails that possessor-phrases are base-generated as specifiers of the possessed NP. Consider a piece of the structure in (25) that illustrates the first step of possessor movement in [+extraction] languages: (25) Agr/DP (order of heads and specifiers irrelevant) Possessor, AgrP™ AgrP [+person] >\ [+number] Spec N [+case] tk Possessum , G Possessor movement to SpecAgrPP forms an A-chain, since possessor phrases check case in this position. Notice that the analysis in (25) is in line with Szabolcsi™s hypothesis that the structure and syntax of noun phrases parallels the structure of clauses. Possessed nouns raise to Agr/D to check its [-interpretable] phi-features and possessors raise to SpecAgrPP to check a [-interpretable] case feature, much in the same way as the verb adjoins to T to check its uninterpretable phi-features and the DP subject checks a ‚strong™ EPPP-feature on T.™ ™ ﬂ This re-analysis of data is consistent with the case-assigning properties of noun phrases in Chamorro. Possessor phrases are not expected to appear in the oblique case, since overt case-markings appear on the nouns which are complements and not specifiers of N heads. 758 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 Next I suggest that the DP possessives in [+extraction] languages share yet another property, namely movement to an A-bar position, SpecDP. The evidence for obligatory possessor movement to this position was drawn from the distributional contrasts between Nominative and Dative wh-possessors in Hungarian and lexical and wh-possessors in Tzotzil. Chung (p.c.) informs me that her informants accept extraction of quantifier possessors such as ‚nobody™, which fits into the claim that SpecDP hosts only operator-like elements in some languages. (It remains to be deter- mined whether lexical possessors are allowed to extract in Chamorro.) The question that needs to be asked at this point is what feature propels possessor movement to an A-bar position. Following the DP/CP parallel, I suggest that it is a ‚strong™ uninter- pretable Q-feature borne by D. This second step of movement delivers wh-posses- sors to an escape hatch position, from where extraction out of the DP is allowed.12 Chomsky™s framework allows for uninterpretable features to be checked by the ‚matching™ interpretable features which do not get deleted in the checking process. Assuming that a wh-possessor bears a [+interpretable] Q feature, it can check a ‚strong™ Q on D and continue to move to Comp, where it also checks a ‚strong™ Q. Consider the full-blown structure in (26) that, I suggest, is shared by the [+extrac- tion] languages: (26) Possessor extraction in [+extraction] languages: DP (ordering of heads and specifiers irrelevant) Possessor, A D AgrPP ‚strong™ e Q-feature t™k AgrP™ AgrP [+case] & [+person] Spec N [+number] tk Possessum , 5 (26) shows that the [+extraction] languages have an articulated DP structure whose composite functional heads (D and AgrP) share a set of [-interpretable] features. i* This proposal will account for the asymmetry in extraction patterns between lexical and wh-posses- sors in languages like Tzotzil, and the obligatory movement of wh-possessors to SpecDP in languages like Hungarian. This line of reasoning implies that D is specified for a ‚strong™ Q only in wh-possessive constructions. The possibility of extracting lexical and wh-possessors in Hungarian can be explained if we assume that extraction of lexical nak-possessors is a case of topicalization as opposed to wh-extrac- tion. In topicalization structures, possessor movement to SpecDP could be driven by a different formal feature (e.g. a ‚strong™ categorial D-feature). Thus, the Hungarian facts can be taken to mean that the specification of D for formal features can vary within a single language. E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 759 Possessor extraction out of the DP proceeds in two steps. This analysis accords with Szabolcsi™s DP=CP Hypothesis. 4.3. The correlation between ‚rich ™ AgriD and possessor extraction There are two points that 1 will elaborate on in the remainder of this section. One concerns the status of Agr/D in the [+extraction] languages. I suggest that Agr/D in these languages should be considered ‚rich™ by virtue of its feature specification (+person/+number/+case) and its ability to trigger ‚possessor agreement™ that shows up overtly in the form of an affix on the possessed NP. An empirically testable pre- diction that I would like to make is that if a language has possessor movement to SpecDP it must have ‚rich™ Agr/D as defined above. This claim is paradoxically opposite to the one suggested in Uriagereka (1988). Recall that Uriagereka™s pro- posal is that languages with a ‚rich™ D should disallow extraction out of NP. Accord- ing to Uriagereka, D counts as ‚rich™ if it is morphologically overt. Here, I define ‚richness™ in terms of the feature make-up of Agr/D and the agreement processes internal to the DP. Thus, my proposal is similar in spirit to Uriagereka (1988), although it makes a reverse claim: languages with possessor extraction must have a ‚rich™ Agr/D. The second point that I would like to take up on concerns Chomsky™s (1995) sug- gestion that feature-checking in the overt syntax should have a visible morphological reflex. There is evidence that the checking of a ‚strong™ Q-feature is reflected in the morphological form of D in [+extraction] languages. Interestingly, the morphological shapes of D are analogous to those of declarative complementizers in cases of sub- ject extraction. In Tzotzil and Chamorro, D is lexicalized as a definite determiner in non-wh possessives. However, it becomes obligatorily null whenever a wh-possessor is extracted out of the DP. The nominal complementizer D in Hungarian is typically spelled-out as the definite determiner a(z), except in possessive have-constructions, where it becomes obligatorily null. If the checking of Q-feature is not visible in the morphological form of D in Hungarian, could it leave a morphological imprint on the possessor? An intriguing possibility might be that the affix -nek may be a morpho- logical reflex of checking a ‚strong™ Q-feature in the Hungarian DP. It is worthwhile to note that Szabolcsi (1994) is ambivalent about treating the -nak/nek morpheme on the possessors as a Dative case marker. In fact, she tentatively suggests that the mor- pheme -nek on a wh-possessor may not be a case-marker at all, since -nek ﬁserves a variety of other un-case-like purposes, such as marking modifiers in left dislocation and in complex predicate constructionsﬂ (1994: 203). If -nek is indeed a spell-out of a ‚strong™ Q on D, the DP=CP analogy can be fully maintained for Hungarian. (Notice that it was somewhat compromised on the analysis of -nek as a case affix, since no case-checking usually takes place in the CP-like projection.) 4.4. Summary The generalization that I proposed is that in [+extraction] languages (Hungarian, Chamorro, Tzotzil), wh-possessors extract out of the DP in two steps in overt syntax. 760 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 The first step of movement is driven by the need to check the uninterpretable phi- features and case-features of an Infl-like head Agr/D. The second step of movement is facilitated by the need to check a ‚strong™ Q-feature of a Comp-like head D. It was also demonstrated that the availability of possessor movement to SpecDP correlates with the ‚richness™ of Agr. A ‚rich™ Agr was identified with a set of case and phi-fea- tures (+person/+number/+Nom) that are visible in the DP via a process of ‚possessor agreement™ that involves possessor movement to SpecAgr/DP and head-adjunction of the possessum to Agr/D. The claim developed here is an elaboration of Szabolcsi™s (1994) intuition that it is the abstract agreement features of functional heads in the DP that determine extractability of possessors. 5. Extraction of DP possessors in Germanic In this section, I examine the possessor movement options in the Germanic lan- guages. It will be shown that in Germanic, wh-possessors move overtly only to an A- position (Spec of Agr/D) to check a [-interpretable] case feature and a set of phi-fea- tures. It is argued that the second step of movement to SpecDP is delayed until LF because the Q-feature on D is posited to be ‚weak™. Thus, pied-piping of the entire wh-possessive construction is enforced in the overt syntax in Germanic. This line of analysis is consistent with Chomsky™s view that parametric differences between lan- guages reside in the ‚timing™ of feature checking operations. The discussion in the subsequent few sections will be organized as follows. First, I investigate the morphosyntactic properties of possessive phrases in Germanic, with some special attention to German, Dutch, and Norwegian. Next, I show how the Germanic data can be incorporated into the approach to parametric differences in possessor extraction developed in this paper. I will continue to discuss the German facts in section 6.2 because German represents the so-called mixed case: while extraction of prenominal DP possessors is ruled out, extraction of postnominal pos- sessors realized as Prepositional Phrases is fully grammatical. 5.1. Case and agreement relations in Germanic possessives The Germanic languages share two characteristics that distinguish them from the [+extraction] languages examined in sections 3 and 4. One characteristic is that some prenominal possessors are overtly marked for Genitive case by means of the ‚s affix. The other characteristic is that they do not display ‚possessor agreement™ of the Hun- garian type.13 In fact, the agreement relations in Germanic possessives are quite dif- ferent. Consider first the data set in (27) that illustrates the Saxon genitive construc- tion. Notice that in Norwegian, only pronominal possessors are allowed to bear the ‚s affix: An anonymous reviewer points out that the ‚S affix in the data set in (27) below could be analyzed as a person marker due to its compatibility with a restricted set of possessors (proper names, third per- son singular or plural possessors, etc.) and the possible origins of ‚s in the third person possessive pro- (27) a. b. C. d. e. f. E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 Peter™s book (English) bok-en hans (Norwegian, from Taraldsen, 1990) book-the his ‚his book™ Fyrirlestur Peturs (Icelandic, from SigurBsson, 1993) lecture Peter™s ‚Peter™s lecture™ Johans bok-en (N. Swedish, from Svenonius, 1993) Johan™s book-the ‚Johan™s book™ Jans auto (Dutch, from Corver, 1990) ‚Jan™s car™ Peters Hunde (German, from Webelhuth, 1992) ‚Peter™s dogs™ 761 The possessive affix analyzed as a Genitive case morpheme by the above researchers suggests that the nominal Agr/D in Germanic possessives can be specified as [+Gen- itive]. Let us call it Agr/D(gen). Under the Minimalist assumptions, an uninter- pretable case feature on Agr/D(gen) must be checked by the possessor phrase via raising to SpecAgr/DP. This is shown in (28): (28) AgrP (ordering of heads and specifiers irrelevant) posse- ™ k Ag&P [+geyfivel sppN tk Possessum It was shown at the onset of the paper (see examples 3-5) that extraction of Genitive possessor phrases is uniformly ruled out across the Germanic languages. Possessive relations can be expressed differently in some of the Germanic lan- guages. For example, some dialects of German (e.g. the Bavarian dialect) as well Dutch and Norwegian have the so-called ‚double™ possessive construction. Consider the representative examples in (29): (29) a. Per sin bok (Norwegian) Per his(refl.) book noun (at least, in languages like Dutch). In this article, I follow an extensive body of literature that ana- lyzes ‚S as a Genitive case marker. I would like to note, however, that my arguments hold regardless of what analysis the ‚S affix receives. 162 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 b. dem Jungen sein Vater (German) the-Dat boy his-Nom.sg.masc. father ‚the boy™s father™ c. de jongen z™n fiets (Dutch) the boy his bike ‚the boy™s bike™ The lexical possessor phrases in (29) are analyzed as specifiers of the possessive pronoun that is taken to project a D head in the nominal structure (Corver, 1990): (30) [or de jongen [o z™n [NP fiets I]] (Dutch) Examples in (31-33) show that extraction of the possessor phrase from SpecDP is ungrammatical (from Corver, 1990): (31) a. [Wie d™r fiets& heb je [tk] gestolen? (Dutch) who her bike have you stolen ‚Whose bike have you stolen? ™ b. *[Wielk heb je [nP tk d™r fiets] gestolen? who have you her bike stolen? (32) a. [Wem seinen Autolk hast du [tk] gesehen? (German) who-Dat his-Act car have you seen ‚Whose car have you seen?™ b. *[Wem], hast du [or tk seinen Wagen] gesehen? Who-Dat have you his-Act car seen (33) a. [Hvem sin bror], kjenner du [tk]? (Norwegian) who 3s.refl brother know You ‚Whose brother do you know?™ b. *[Hvem], kjenner du [or tk sin bror] ? who know You 3s.refl brother The ‚double™ possessives provide a glimpse into the nature of agreement relations in the possessive DP. Consider first the data set in (34-35) from German: (34) German: a. dem Vater sein Buch the-Dat father his-Nom.sg.masc. book ‚the father™s book™ b. dem Vater seine Mutter the-Dat father his-Nom.sg.fem. mother ‚the father™s mother™ c. dem Vater seine Biicher the-Dat father his-Nom.pl. books ‚the father™s books™ E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 763 d. den Vatem ihr Buch the-Dat fathers their-Nom.sg.masc. book ‚the fathers™ book™ e. den Vatem ihre Bticher the-Dat fathers their-Nom.pl. books ‚the fathers ™ books ™ (35) a. der Mutter ihr Vater the-Dat mother her-Nom.sg.masc. father ‚the mother™s father™ b. der Mutter ihre Katze the-Dat mother her-Nom.sg.fam. cat ‚the mother™s cat™ c. der Mutter ihre Autos the-Dat mother her-Nom.pl. cars ‚the mother™s cars™ d. den Mt.&tern ihr Auto the-Dat mothers their-Nom.sg.masc. car ‚the mothers™ car™ e. den Miittem ihre Autos the-Dat mothers their-Nom.pl. cars ‚the mothers™ cars™ The data above show that there is no Hungarian-like ‚possessor agreement™ in the German DP. The agreement relations hold not between the possessor and the pos- sessed noun but between the possessor (or the possessum) and the possessive pro- noun sein (‚his™) or ihr (‚her™ or ‚their™). The possessive pronoun overtly agrees in person and gender with the possessor and in number and gender with the possessed noun. The possessor bears Dative case which shows up on the determiner. Thus, there is a two-way agreement relation within the German ‚double™ possessive: head- complement and specifier-complement. This suggests that Agr/D in some German dialects can be specified as [+dative] as well as bear a set of phi-features (person, number, and gender). These phi-features are distributed between the specifier and the complement, as opposed to showing up as a set on one of the NPs (e.g. the pos- sessum, as in Hungarian, Chamorro, and Tzotzil). Consider now the data in (36-37) from Dutch where only third person possessive pronouns occur in ‚double™ possessives: I4 I4 Jeannette Schaefer, my Dutch (linguist) informant, kindly provided me with the Dutch data. The grammaticality judgments concerning possessive constructions with plural possessors and plural posses- sive pronouns are her own. An anonymous reviewer points out that the restriction to third person singu- lar possessives is subject to geographical variation for Dutch: third person plural possessors and pro- nouns are perfect in Southern Dutch varieties. 764 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 (36) Dutch: a. het meisje d™r fiets the girl her bike ‚the girl™s bike™ b. het meisje d™r fietsen the girl™s her bikes ‚the girl™s bikes™ c. ?de meisjes hun fiets the girls their bike ‚the girls™ bike™ d. ?de meisjes hun fietsen the girls their bikes ‚the girls™ bikes™ (37) a. de jongen z™n fiets the boy his bike ‚the boy™s bike™ b. de jongen z™n fietsen the boy his bikes ‚the boy™s bikes™ c. ?de jongens hun fiets the boys their bike ‚the boys™ bike™ d. ?de jongens hun fietsen the boys their bikes ‚the boys™ bikes™ In Dutch, the possessive pronoun shows agreement in person, gender and number with the possessor. There is no overt agreement between the pronoun and the pos- sessed NP. These facts suggest that Agr/D in Dutch ‚double™ possessives bears a set of phi-features [person/number/gender] that are presumably checked by the posses- sor phrase via movement to Spec of Agr/D. Interestingly, in both Dutch and German, the phi-features are spelled-out on the Agr/D head. 5.2. Why cannot prenominal possessors extract in Germanic? In this section, I articulate a proposal that accounts for the contrasts between the Germanic extraction data and the Hungarian-type of languages. It was argued in the preceding sections that prenominal possessors can extract, provided that they extract via an A-bar position in the DP. This argument was built on the work of Szabolcsi who showed that possessor phrases behave syntactically as clausal subjects in terms of (a) case and agreement relations that they trigger in the DP; (b) an extraction path that requires movement through an escape hatch position. Pursuing the DP=CP analogy, it can be assumed that prenominal possessors in Germanic are also required to extract in two steps by virtue of being subjects of the DP. E. Gavruseva I Lingua I10 (2000) 743-772 76.5 I argued earlier that in [+extraction] languages, possessor movement to SpecDP is driven by a ‚strong™ Q-feature on D. This line of analysis implicates that possessor movement to an escape hatch must take place in overt syntax. Thus, the level at which possessors move to SpecDP is crucially involved in determining extraction patterns in a language. The Germanic facts can be handled in a straightforward way if we assume that possessor phrases fail to move to SpecDP in overt syntax. This idea can be easily implemented in Chomsky™s (1995) framework. I propose that the Q-feature on D is ‚weak™ in Germanic, hence, possessor movement to SpecDP is delayed until LF. The distributional evidence supports my proposal: the Germanic languages do not manifest a complementary distribution between lexical and wh- possessors that would suggest obligatory movement to SpecDP. The lack of such distributional contrasts indicates that overt possessor movement in the DP is not available in Germanic. My proposal also entails that Germanic possessives have an articulated DP structure, a la Szabolcsi (1983/1984) and Kayne (1993). Table 1 summarizes the differences between the Germanic and Hungarian-type of languages : Table I Parametric differences in the specification of Agr/D and D Language Germanic The content of Agr/TI [+Gen]/[+Dat] (person/number/gender) no ‚possessor agreement™ The content of D ‚weak™ Q-feature Extraction No Hungarian Tzotzil Chamorro [+Nom] (person/number) ‚possessor agreement™ ‚strong™ Q-feature Yes Finally, I would like to comment on the feature content of Agr/D in Germanic and the way it correlates with the extraction data. It was proposed for the [+extraction] languages that the availability of possessor movement to SpecDP correlates with the ‚richness™ of Agr, namely its specification as [+person/+number] and its ability to trigger ‚possessor agreement™. Notice that as far as the feature content is concerned, Agr/D in Germanic is just as ‚rich™ (if not ‚richer™ due to its [+gender] feature spec- ification) as in the Hungarian type of languages. However, the second component of ‚richness™, namely, the ability to trigger ‚possessor agreement™, is missing. These dif- ferences in the properties of Agr/D between the two types of languages indicate that agreement relations in the DP may subtly interact with extraction possibilities. This view has been voiced in some prior research on extraction. Tappe who examines top- icalization possibilities out of NPs in German suggests that ﬁonly languages with sufficient agreement will allow extractionﬂ (1989: 178). It is suggested in this work that ‚sufficient™ agreement necessarily involves the possessor-possessed NP agree- ment in person and number if a constituent undergoing extraction is a prenominal possessor. In addition, case relations in the DP, in particular, morphological overt- 766 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 ness or covertness of case on the prenominal possessor, may also contribute to the possibility of possessor movement to SpecDP. In [+extraction] languages, extracted possessors bear morphologically covert Nominative case features, whereas extraction in Germanic fails on a constituent which is either overtly marked for Genitive case (e.g. hvers, whose) or covertly marked for Dative or Genitive (e.g. wem, wessen).15 6. Extraction of prepositional possessors In this section, I briefly discuss the extraction facts concerning prepositional pos- sessor phrases. First, I introduce the specifier Hypothesis of Giorgi and Longobardi (1991) and discuss how it dovetails with the DP=CP Hypothesis of Szabolcsi (1983/1984, 1994). Next, I discuss extraction of PP possessors in German and com- ment on the nature of the parameter that gives rise to the so-called mixed languages (not uniformly [-extraction] languages). 6.1. The specifier hypothesis Szabolcsi™s research on Hungarian possessives and the work of Giorgi and Lon- gobardi (1991) (henceforth G&L) on Italian converge on one point: possessor phrases are allowed to extract through the peripheral specifier position in the NP. G&L™s analysis of possessor extraction in Italian draws on the work of Cinque (1980) who observes that (a) only di NP (‚of NP™) phrases can be extracted out of NP and that (b) extractable di NP phrases are interpreted as subjects of the head noun. To illustrate Cinque™s point, consider the examples in (38): (38) a. il desiderio [PPdi Gianni] (Italian) ‚the desire of Gianni™ . . . . b. la descnzione h,r di Gianm] ‚the description of Gianni™ The interpretation of dz™ Gianni in (38a) is ambiguous: it can be interpreted either as the theme of the desire, or the experiencer of it. Likewise, the reading of di Gianni in (38b) is ambiguous between the theme of the description and the agent of it. Cinque refers to the interpretation of di Gianni as experiencer/agent as a ‚subject™ reading and observes that the same reading would obtain if di Gianni were a subject of the verbs ‚to desire™ and ‚to describe™. In addition, Cinque points out that the ‚subject™ reading of di NP arguments is preserved when they are replaced with a possessive pronoun or when they are wh- I thank an anonymous reviewer for this observation. The reviewer also suggests that parametric dif- ferences in possessor extraction can possibly be reduced to case properties of possessors. I disagree. While certainly a contributing factor, case relations in the DP alone do not capture the Hungarian data, where Nominative possessors which are covertly marked for case cannot extract out of the DP unless they move to an escape hatch position. E. Gavruseva I Lingua 1 IO (2000) 743-772 767 extracted. In (39), di Giunni is replaced with a possessive pronoun that can be inter- preted only as the subject of ‚desire™ and ‚description™: (39) a. il sue desiderio the his desire ‚his desire™ b. la sua descrizione the his description ‚his description™ Similarly, example (40) below illustrates that a wh-extracted di Gianni receives a subject reading: (40) Gianni, [di cu& abbiamo ricordato [il desiderio tk ] Gianni, of whom (we) remembered the desire ‚Gianni, whose desire we remembered.™ In (40), a wh-extracted PP appears as a relative pronoun di cui (‚of whom™) associ- ated with Gianni and is interpreted as the subject of desiderio. Hence, Cinque pro- poses that only di NPs that are interpreted as subjects can be extracted out of NP in Italian. This proposal is known as Cinque™s generufization. G&L investigate whether there is a structural basis for Cinque™s claim. They examine the structural properties of noun phrases in Romance and propose that di NP arguments with a ‚subject™ reading occupy a structural subject position in the NP. A structural subject position is taken to be a specifier position projected on the right edge of the N-bar. Consider the diagram in (41): NP (Italian) Subject position The possibility of projecting a specifier to the right of the N-bar is taken to be a distinct property of noun phrases in Romance. G&L suggest, further, that extraction of di NPs takes place through SpecNP projected on the left edge of the N-bar. Just like Szabolcsi (1983/1984), G&L motivate this movement step by the necessity to turn the head N into a proper governor for the trace in the base subject position. Con- sider the representation in (42): (42) di cui,..... [ il [NP ‚t, [N™ [desiderio] tk I]] As shown in (42), the di NP possessors cannot be extracted in one fell swoop and are required to move through the Spec of NP. By extension, G&L argue that di NPs with a theme reading are base-generated as complements of the noun head and suggest that N-complements cannot move to SpecNP (presumably, N-complements cannot 768 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 trigger Spec-Head agreement with N). The structural differences between comple- ments and specifiers of N are illustrated in (43): (43) il desiderio di Maria di Gianni (il) &Gianni) N™ N PP desiderio di Maria The claim that PP possessors extract through the Spec of NP is supported by the fact that such extraction is blocked when this position is occupied. In (44), the Spec of NP is filled with a possessive pronoun and extraction of di Gianni is ungrammat- ical : (44) *Gianni, [di cuilk abbiamo ricordato [il suo desiderio tk] Gianni, of whom (we) remembered the his desire Thus, the DP=CP Hypothesis can be maintained for extraction of PP possessors in Italian. The subject-like properties of possessor phrases in Italian were established on the basis of interpretative contrasts (‚subject™ vs. ‚theme™ readings), impossibility of a ‚theme™ reading when a possessor is realized as a possessive pronoun, and the impossibility of extracting a ‚subject™ possessor PP across a possessive pronoun. 6.2. Extraction of PP possessors in German This section shows that G&L™s proposal can be extended to German. The discus- sion of German facts will be partially based on the work of Pafel(1995) who mainly discusses topicalization possibilities out of NP. Here I present the wh-versions of his topicalization examples. As shown in (45), German allows extraction of PP posses- sors with a ‚subject™ and a ‚theme™ reading from object positions: (45) [Von wem], hat sie [nr das Bild tk] gesehen? of who-Dat has she the picture seen ‚Whose picture has she seen? ™ (45) is grammatical on a ‚subject™ and a ‚theme™ reading of the PP. Extraction of PPs from subject positions of lexical verbs and ‚individual™ level predicates is ungram- matical, as shown in (46): (46) a. ? *[Van wem] sind [or einige Bilder tk] unansehnlich? of whom are some pictures unsightly ‚Some pictures of whom are unsightly? ™ E. Gavruseva I Lingua I10 (2000) 743-772 769 b. *[Van wem], hat [or, der Freund tk] diese Theorie entwickelt? of whom has the friend this theory developed ‚Whose friend has developed this theory? ™ Pafel (1995) notes that if a noun takes several PP complements, their extraction obeys the ‚possessor > agent > theme™ hierarchy: it is always an argument with a ‚higher™ thematic role that gets extracted. I6 Thus, in the structures such as in (47) only the PP with a ‚possessor™ thematic role is allowed to extract: (47) das Poster von Madonna von Maria ‚Mary™s Poster of Madonna™ The question of relevance for our discussion is whether extraction of PP argu- ments of NP in German proceeds through a peripheral specifier position. The empir- ical evidence suggests that it does. To show this, I will attempt to extract a PP argu- ment from an NP that has a genitive specifier. As shown earlier, this is taken to be a standard test for the obligatory extraction via a peripheral position. Consider first the examples in (48): (48) a. b. Maria™s Bild von Peter ‚Maria™s picture of Peter™ ihr Bild von Peter ‚her picture of Peter™ If extraction out of NP in German proceeds through an escape hatch position, the Genitive NP will induce a violation of the Minimal Link condition (Chomsky, 1995), as it will force a PP argument to skip a specifier position on its way out of NP. The data in (49) show that this prediction is borne out: (49) a. *[Vun wem], hat Hans [or Maria™s Bild tk] gesehen? of whom has Hans Maria™s picture seen b. *[Vun wem], hat Hans [or ihr Bild t,J gesehen? of whom has Hans her picture seen On the basis of (49) we can conclude that extraction of PP arguments in German proceeds through an escape hatch position in the DP. Thus, German has a mixed sta- tus with respect to extraction of possessor phrases. On the one hand, extraction of prenominal Genitive and Dative possessors is disallowed. On the other hand, PP pos- sessors can extract out of the DP. The relevant question at this point is this: What parameter is responsible for the existence of mixed languages like German? I pro- pose that the Q-feature on D in German is parameterized: its values alternate between ‚strong™ and ‚weak™ settings. Furthermore, the specification of Q as ‚strong™ I6 Godard (1992) essentially proposes the same hierarchy for French, labelling an argument with a ‚higher™ thematic role a ‚first™ argument of the NP. 770 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 or ‚weak™ interacts with case relations in the possessive DP. In the structures with PP possessors, possessors receive Dative case from the preposition van (‚of™), which is an inherent case assigner in German. There is no syntactic category that assigns structural case in the DP. The Q-feature on D is presumably ‚strong™ as it licenses possessor movement through SpecDP. I have shown earlier that the Q-feature on D is ‚weak™ whenever a case-assigning Agr/D is present in the structure. This proposal can be formalized as follows: (SO) Parameterization of D in German: D: ‚strong™ Q and inherent case on the possessor + [+extraction] D: ‚weak™ Q and structural case on the possessor + [-extraction] 7. Conclusion In this article, I examined the distribution patterns of possessor phrases and the constraints on their extraction across a range of languages, focusing on the contrast between the Germanic languages on the one hand, and Hungarian, Tzotzil, and Chamorro, on the other. I argued that the possibility of possessor extraction in lan- guages with overt wh-movement hinges on one syntactic condition, namely, obliga- tory movement of a possessor phrase through an escape hatch position, SpecDP. Fur- thermore, I argued that this necessary step of possessor movement must take place in overt syntax. Following the DP=CP Hypothesis (Szabolcsi, 1983/1984), I suggested that possessor movement to SpecDP is driven by a Q-feature whose ‚strength™ is parameterized. The ‚strength™ of the Q-feature was shown to interact with case and agreement relations in the possessive DP. I proposed that Q is ‚strong™ in languages where the possessive DP shows ‚possessor agreement™ in person and number between the possessor and the possessum. This generalization holds for the [+extrac- tion] languages, like Hungarian, Tzotzil, and Chamorro. For the Germanic lan- guages, I argued that Q on D is ‚weak™, therefore, possessor movement to SpecDP is delayed until LF. Consequently, prenominal possessors in Germanic cannot comply with the condition on extraction that requires movement to SpecDP in overt syntax. The ungrammaticality of possessor extraction follows. This approach is in line with Chomsky™s (1995) claim that parametric differences between languages are reducible to the ‚timing™ of feature-checking operations. Finally, I showed that not all languages lend themselves to a classification as uniformly [-extraction] or [+extraction] languages. I argued that German has a mixed status, as it shows differing extraction options for postnominal PP possessors (+extraction) and prenominal DP possessors (-extraction). Although the extraction possibilities in German vary by the syntactic category of the possessor, I argued, nevertheless, that the observed differences can be reduced to one property: the abil- ity of a possessor phrase to move to SpecDP. It needs to be pointed out that the pro- posal developed here appeals to two independently motivated ‚parameters™ of vari- ation : whether or not possessor phrases move overtly in the syntax for feature-checking purposes; and whether or not possessor phrases are analyzed as E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 771 DP or PP arguments of the possessed NP. Since these are in both cases fundamen- tally lexical properties, this seems to be a desirable result from a Minimalist per- spective. References Abney, S.P., 1987. The English noun phrase in its sentential aspect. Ph.D. dissertation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Aissen, J., 1996. Pied-piping, abstract agreement, and functional projections in Tzotzil. Natural Lan- guage and Linguistic Theory 14, 447491. Bowers, J., 1988. Extended X-bar theory, the ECP, and the left branch condition. Proceedings of the West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics 7, 47-62. Cinque, G., 1980. On extraction from NP in Italian. Journal of Italian Linguistics l(2), 47-99. Cinque, G., 1990. Types of A-bar dependencies. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1973. Conditions on transformations. In S.R. Anderson and P. Kiparsky (eds.), A festschrift for Morris Halle, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, 232-286. Chomsky, N,. 198 1. Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris. Chomsky, N., 1986. Barriers. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1989. Some notes on economy of derivation and representation. In: I. Laka and A. Maha- jan (eds.), MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 10, 43-74. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1995. A minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chung, S., 1991. Functional heads and proper government in Chamorro. Lingua 85, 85-134. Corver, N., 1990. The syntax of left branch extractions. Ph.D. dissertation, Tilburg University. den Dikken, M., 1998. (Anti-)agreement in DP. In: R. van Bezooijen and R. Kager (eds.), Linguistics in the Netherlands, 77-214. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Diesing, M., 1992. Indefinites. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Fiengo, R. and J. Higginbotham, 1981. Opacity in NP. Linguistic Analysis 7, 395-421. Gavruseva, E., 1997. The syntax of possessive phrases and acquisition of whose-questions: A compara- tive study of child Ll and L2 grammars. Ph.D. dissertation, Georgetown University. Giorgi, A. and G. Longobardi, 1991. The syntax of noun phrases: Configurations, parameters, and empty categories. New York: Cambridge University Press. Godard, D., 1992. Extraction out of NP in French. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 10, 233-277. Grosu, A., 1974. On the nature of the left branch condition. Linguistic Inquiry 5, 308-319. Huang, J., 1982. Logical relations in Chinese and the theory of grammar. Ph.D. dissertation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Kayne, R., 1993. Toward a modular theory of auxiliary selection. Studia Linguistica 47, 3-31. Lasnik, H. and M. Saito, 1992. Move alpha: Conditions on its applications and output. MIT Press, Cam- bridge, Mass. Mahajan, A., 1992. The specificity condition and the CED. Linguistic Inquiry 23, 510-515. Pafel, J., 1995. Kinds of extraction from noun phrases. In: U. Lutz and J. Pafel (eds.), On extraction and extraposition in German, 145-177. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Rizzi, L., 1990. Relativized minimality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Ross, J.R., 1986 [1967]. Infinite syntax! Norwood, NJ: Ablex. Sigu&son, H., 1993. The structure of the Icelandic NP. Studia Linguistica 47, 177-197. Stowell, T., 1989. Subjects, specifiers, and X-bar theory. In: M. Baltin and A. Kroch (eds.), Alternative conceptions of phrase structure, 232-262. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press. Svenonius, P., 1993. Selection, adjunctions, and concord in the DP. Studia Linguistica 47, 198-220. Szabolcsi, A., 1983/1984. The possessor that ran away from home. The Linguistic Review 3, 89-102. Szabolcsi, A., 1994. The noun phrase. In: F. Kiefer and K. Kiss (eds.), Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 27: The syntactic structure of Hungarian, 179-274. New York: Academic Press. 112 E. Gavruseva I Lingua 110 (2000) 743-772 Tappe, H., 1989. A note on split topicalization in German. In: C. Bhatt, E. L&e1 and C. Schmidt (eds.), Syntactic phrase structure phenomena in noun phrases and sentences, 159-179. Amsterdam: Ben- jamins. Taraldsen, K., 1990. D-projections and N-projections in Norwegian. In: J. Mascaro and M. Nespor (eds.), Grammar in progress, 419-432. Dordrecht: Foris. Uriagereka, J., 1988. On government. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Connecticut. Webelhuth, G., 1992. Principles and parameters of syntactic saturation. New York: Oxford University Press. 