ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 717.-742 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Demonstrative determiners and operators : The case of Greek* Phoevos Panagiotidisﬂ Department of Language and Linguistics, University of Essex. Colchester, Essex CO4 3SQ, UK Received 31 May 1999; revised version 20 November 1999 Abstract This paper offers a new account of the different positions Greek demonstratives can occupy within DP. Building on work by Campbell (1996), Brug5 (1996) and Giusti (1997), I assume that while sometimes demonstratives are merged low and subsequently move to SpecDP, they sometimes stay in situ. Departing from views of the above researchers, I fur- thermore argue that - at least in Greek - demonstratives in SpecDP have clear semantic prop- erties that distinguish them from those in situ and that word order variations of the in-situ position can be independently accounted for, once the option of movement of N to Num is taken into consideration. Moreover, based on additional evidence from Northern Greek, Catalan, Romanian and Macedonian, I distinguish between demonstrative operators and deictic determiners: demonstrative operator movement is parallel to wh-movement, as in Horrocks and Stavrou (1987), triggered by features of deictic determiners; the possibility of a language possessing only deictic determiners (like this and that) is also accommodated. Finally, a correlation between morphological visibility and strength is attempted in the spirit of Thrhinsson™s (1996) Real Minimalist Principle. 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Demonstrative; N-movement; Num; Determiner; Strength; Operator; Greek * I wish to express my gratitude to the following people for their help and suggestions: IO Manolessou, Roger Hawkins, Anastasia Giannakidou, Melita Stavrou, Marcel Den D&ken, Giuliana Giusti, Andrew Spencer, Ivy Sichel, Luis Silva Villar, Eric Mathieu and an anonymous Lingua reviewer. The analysis presented here is based on Manolessou and Panagiotidis (1999). A11 errors remain mine. Finally, I wish to thank the Greek Scholarship Foundation for funding my Ph.D. research. * Phone: +44 1206 530 741; E-mail: epanag@essex.ac.uk 037%2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00014-0 718 Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 1. The problem A standard analysis for demonstratives is the one assumed by Abney™s (1987) DP hypothesis, namely that demonstratives are Determiners, like articles and pronouns. This should come as no surprise, as demonstratives form a closed class, do not carry descriptive features (Abney, 1987: 284-285) and occur in complementary distribu- tion with articles: (1) a. this boy b. ce garqon (2) a. the boy b. le gaqon (3) a. *this the boy b. *ce le garqon English French So far so good. Consider the following examples, though: in a lot of languages, exemplified below by Irish and Modem Greek (MG henceforth), not only demon- stratives and articles co-occur (as in 4) but they co-occur obligatorily (5): (4) a. an fear se0 the man this b. aftos o andras this the man ‚this man™ (5) a. *fear se0 b. *aftos andras Irish Greek In this paper I am going to focus on MG, as the situation in this particular lan- guage is slightly more complicated - and more interesting, I hope -than that in (4b). Consider: (6) a. aftos 0 (neos) andras this the young man b. o andras aftos C. *o aftos andras d. o neos aftos andras ‚this young man™ More precisely, the demonstrative can appear in (at least) the following positions: - DP initially, henceforth DP-ini, as in (6a) - post-nominally, henceforth p-N, as in (6b) - post-adjectivally, henceforth p-A, but before the noun as in (6d) Demonstratives in MG cannot appear either directly after the article or without a (definite) article at all, see (6~) and (5b). Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua II0 (2000) 717-742 719 In this paper, an analysis of all the occurrences in (6) is to be attempted building on work by Stavrou and Horrocks (1989), Bruge (1996) Campbell (1996) and Giusti (1997). Furthermore, I will attempt a unified account of the behaviour of ‚Greek- type™ demonstratives (appealing to Romanian, Spanish and Macedonian data, as well) to that of the more familiar ones in (1). In section 2, I will lay out the descrip- tive facts about the various positions a demonstrative can (not) occupy within a DP in MG. In section 3, an overview of the existing analyses will be presented and in 4 an alternative analysis is to be offered. In section 5, aspects of the relationship between morphology and strength are to be discussed in the light of Thrainsson™s ‚Real Minimalist Principle™. 2. Greek demonstratives 2.1. The distribution within DP MG demonstratives are morphologically marked for number, gender and morpho- logical case, like all other DP elements in Greek: nouns, adjectives, articles, cardinal numerals, quantifiers and so on. Like adjectives, articles numerals etc. they agree with the N head when in a DP: for instance, all the examples in (4b) and (6) are marked for masculine gender, nominative case and singular number. There are no ‚3rd person™ pronouns in Greek, having disappeared around the 6th-5th c. BC and, as in Latin and Turkish, demonstratives substitute for them. The default order of con- stituents in a DP is Noun Object Subject: i katalipsi [DP_Ren tis polis] [pp apo tus RosusJ (‚the capture of the city by the Russians™); the object of a noun must be in Genitive and the subject can be either in Genitive or a PP but only one phrase in Genitive per noun is permitted (Ouhalla, 1991: 19 I-195). 2.1 .I. The DP initial position (DP-inij As far as the position of demonstratives, when in the left periphery of a DP, is concerned, there is a clear preference for them to follow quantifiers (7) and focused genitives (8) : ™ (7) a. oli afti i katiki all these the inhabitants b. ?afti oh ikatiki ‚all these inhabitants™ (8) a. ? [tis polis J afti i katiki t,,, pcJlrs the-gen city-gen these the inhabitants b. * afti [tis polis] i katiki ‚all these inhabitants of the city™ ™ On focused genitives in DP, see Horrocks and Stavrou (1987). 720 Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 The above illustrate a preference for the demonstrative to be adjacent to the article, irrespective of the actual position of quantifiers and preposed (focused) genitives in MG. Judgements about (7b) improve with an intonational break after oli or, as a Lin- gua reviewer points out, ‚when there is a continuation™. To elaborate on this second point: (7b) is much better when the DP is in Topic position, rather than when it is an object or a post-verbal subject,2 possibly for independent reasons I have no account for. A number of speakers consider (8a) bad, although it is acceptable to me. Its mar- ginal status is possibly related to the infelicitous interaction of the deictic function of the demonstrative with focus. To abstract away, (7a) is much better than (7b) and both instances of (8) are bad with flat intonation: the demonstrative and the article display a strong tendency to be adjacent when the former is in DP-ini position, 2.1.2. The postnominal position (p-N) MG demonstratives can also appear after the noun of the DP, the article always being obligatory. An interesting piece of evidence relates to the interaction of geni- tive phrases and p-N demonstratives. Genitive normally follows the noun in Modem Greek (see the introduction to this section) - the demonstrative can intervene though.3 (9) a. i katiki the inhabitants b. i katiki the inhabitants tis polis the-gen city-gen afti tis polis these the-gen city-gen Some cases divergent to (9) do exist and will be discussed in section 2.1.4. below. The importance of the relative order between the demonstrative in post-N position and a genitive phrase will become apparent when the position in which the demon- strative is merged will be discussed. 2 .I .3. Postadjectival position (p-A) A prima facie complication is the following (as in 6d), as there appears to exist an extra position for the demonstrative: (10) i nei afti katiki the new these inhabitants ‚these new inhabitants™ Suppose now we want the noun modified by both an adjective (like in 9) and a gen- itive at the same time. The resulting word order is the following: 2 VSO is argued to be the basic word order in Greek (Philippaki-Warburton, 1985; Tsimpli, 1990; Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou, 1998) 3 Giusti (1997: 112) has shown the same to be true for Kiswahili. See Brugs (1996: 14-16) for a more detailed analysis based on Spanish and involving PP arguments of N. Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 721 (11) a. i nei afti katiki tis polis the new these inhabitants the-gen city-gen b. *i nei katiki afti tis polis the new inhabitants these the-gen city-gen ‚these new inhabitants of the city™ (11 b) is really bad - and for most speakers ungrammatical - unless skilfully manip- ulated in terms of intonation: a break after the demonstrative improves things some- how. Hence, an important generalisation would be the following: when the demonstra- tive is not in a DP-ini position and if an adjective is present, it obligatorily follows the adjective instead of the noun. In other words: (12) p-N and p-A positions of demonstratives are in complementary distribution. The above generalisation is important because it will guide us in our attempt in sec- tion 4 to discern the aspects of demonstrative placement that are due to idiosyn- crasies of MG to those that reflect cross-linguistic phenomena. 2.1.4. A DP final position? Constructions like the following are acceptable and, prima facie, flatly contradict the generalisation in (12). Most speakers find them somehow forced but, neverthe- less, grammatical. (13) a. i katiki tis polis afti the inhabitants the-gen city-gen these b. i nei katiki afti the new inhabitants these Again, a break before afti can improve acceptability. Given that both examples have a dislocation ‚feel™, we would be tempted to analyse them as such, that is, instances of right dislocation. What is more interesting, though, is that both instances of (13) seem to share the semantics of DP-ini positions, an issue to be touched upon in sec- tion 2.2. Abiding by Kayne™s (1994) LCA, we could derive them from the relevant DP-ini constructions via remnant movement of the DP to a higher position. So, for instance, (13b) could have the following structure: [[i nei katiki] [afli [ti nei korikil]]. Nevertheless, nothing follows from this for the purposes of our discussion here, the important point is that examples in (13) pattern up with DP-ini ones and, possibly, derive from them. 2.1 S. Abstracting away from Cfurther) complications Authors like Brugi? (1996) and Giusti (1997) use a lot of Greek examples involving the phenomenon of determiner spreading (Androutsopoulou, 1996; Alexiadou and Wilder, 1998) to portray the possibilities of demonstrative placement in MG: 122 (14) a. aft0 to vivlio to kalo this the book the good b. afto to kalo to vivlio this the good the book Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 ‚this good book™ All the above examples are perfectly grammatical with or without the demonstrative and no intonational break is needed. If Alexiadou and Wilder are correct in assum- ing that determiner spreading involves a reduced relative, the above and similar examples are certainly not equivalent to ‚simple™ DPs we are concerned with here. As the aim of this paper is not to deal with the complex issue of determiner spread- ing, suffice it to say here that afto to vivlio in (14a) and ufto to kulo in (14b) seem to be a single constituent either modifying (cf. Androutsopoulou, 1996) or being pred- icated of (cf. Alexiadou and Wilder, 1998) the (constituent that contains the) second DP. A similar situation seems to be the case for those Greek examples where two adjectives ‚sandwich™ the demonstrative: (15) to kalo afto (to) neo vivlio the good this the new book ‚this good new book™ Given that the presence of the article to in parenthesis improves the example signif- icantly, I will tentatively assume that two constituents are present here, on a par with the cases of determiner spreading in (14).4 A possible structure for the actual rela- tionship between these two constituents, apparently DPs, is illustrated in (16) below: (16) [or [nr to kalo afto e] [or (to) neo vivlio]15 In any case, (14) and (15) are not simple DPs and will not be discussed any further in the present analysis, which aims to define the position(s) of demonstratives and their interaction with the determiner in exactly the ‚simple™ cases. 2.2. The semantics of the diflerent positions Fortunately, the choice among different positions for the demonstrative is any- thing but optional, although the different interpretations each of them triggers are only subtly distinguished among them. As shown in Manolessou and Panagiotidis (1999), there is indeed a semantic difference between the DP-ini and the p-N/p-A positions, the latter two being only structural variants of each other, as the generali- sation in (12) states. Unfortunately, this difference is hardly discussed in any gram- mars of Modem Greek and judgements therein, when present, are not either well 4 But see also Stavrou (1996, 1999). ™ On whether an empty noun, the e in (IS), is necessary in such constructions, see Kester (1996), Gian- nakidou and Stavrou (1998) and Panagiotidis (in preparation). Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 1 IO (2000) 717-742 723 attested or uncontroversial: in fact they sometimes tend to be counter-intuitive.6 For the time being, suffice it to say that the DP-ini position is the genuinely ostensive one, whereas the p-N/p-A one has a discourse anaphoric function: in other words only the DP initial position is really deictic and can possibly accompany a pointing gesture; the p-N/p-A positions are reserved to point to the linguistic context instead of the real world and can hardly be used to introduce a new topic. Consider, for instance: (17) (at the butcher™s, pointing to a pork joint) a. Thelo afto to (apaho) butaki I-want this the lean joint b. # Thelo to butaki afto™ i-want the joint this c. # Thelo to apaho afto butaki I-want the lean this joint ‚I want this lean joint™ On the other hand, the postnominal/postadjectival positioning is run-of-the-mill in continuous discourse, scientific texts and so on - but afways either referring to a dis- course antecedent or presupposing the existence of the thing ‚pointed to™ (for dis- cussion: Manolessou and Panagiotidis, 1999). 3. Existing analyses 3.1. Stavou and Horrocks (1989) Stavrou and Hoi-rocks build on what we could consider the zero hypothesis, namely that both DP-ini and p-N/p-A positions are derived from the same ‚deep structure™. They also consider the demonstrative itself an XP, rather than a head, base generated as a complement of the noun and either staying there or moving to SpecDP. Thus, our (6a) would look like this: (18) [SpecDP aftosi [n o [Np andras ti]]] (6b) would be the same with the demonstrative aftos staying in situ. Moreover, in order to explain the postadjectival order, Stavrou and Horrocks assume that the demonstrative is a sort of phrasal clitic that can attach to the right of adjectives as h See Manolessou and Panagiotidis (1999: 200-203) for discussion of judgements in traditional gram- mars and a survey of p-N/p-A uses vs. DP-ini ones. ™ Melita Stavrou (pc.) pointed out to me that this construction is fine with deictic gesture and emphatic (perhaps Focus?) intonation on the demonstrative. This is indeed true for some speakers, but I believe that in this case we deal with instances of DPs with DP-ini demonstrative that have subsequently under- gone ‚right dislocation™, like example (13) in section 2.1.4. 124 Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 well, something along the terms of Cardinaletti and Starke™s (1994) weuk pro- noun, in other words8 They also draw a neat parallelism between wh-movement and the movement of the demonstrative, something that will be further explored in our analysis. A problematic point of their analysis is the idea that the demonstra- tive originates as a complement of the noun. On the conceptual side, if the com- plement of N is where arguments of the noun in genitive are base generated too, as they argue, and if the noun e-marks its complement, then what kind of e-role do demonstratives receive? Can it be one identical or comparable with that of a genitive argument of the noun? On the empirical side, how is the co-occurrence of demonstratives and genitive XPs explained, as in (9b), with both the demonstra- tive and the genitive XP arguably in situ? Finally, in a theory of grammar without right adjunction, the p-A position of the demonstrative must be ‚renegotiated™, as it cannot be the case that the demonstrative can move and attach to the right of an adjective. 3.2. Campbell (1996) Campbell (1996: 167) proposes that demonstratives ﬁare overt specificity opera- tors in SpecDPﬂ. He further assumes that they are moved there from some lower specifier within the DP, driven by what he calls the th-criterion, on a par with wh- criterion. Although this is not explicitly spelled out in the paper by Campbell, one can safely assume a [+th] feature to encode specificity/definiteness. (19) Campbell™s th-criterion: A [+TH] determiner has a [+TH] specifier, and a [+TH] operator specifies a [+TH] determiner. In fact, although Campbell™s claim is exemplified on MG data (1996: 168), he assumes that all demonstratives are in SpecDP, including English ones. In most lan- guages they do not co-occur with an article because of a ﬁdoubly filled Dﬂ filter (again, on a par with the ‚doubly filled Comp™ one). A consequence of this is that demonstratives are XPs cross-linguistically. This assumption, that demonstratives are XPs at SpecDP cross-linguistically, is shared by a number of researchers (see below) and raises a crucial question about the feature specification of the D head that co-occurs with them. More specifically, a null D head (as in English, the story goes) with an XP specifier like this is trivially homophonous to the null partitive/generic D head in the same language (like in 0 bacon is fattening and I like 0 tomatoes). If Longobardi (1994) is right that null D heads force an existential interpretation, their feature (under)specification is incom- patible with their being able to be [+th], as (19) requires. On the other hand, if two lexical entries exist for D, both phonologically null but differing in the one being existential and the other, say, [+th], then learnability issues are certain to arise: exis- * But minus the phonological cliticisation (M. Stavrou, p.c.). In any case, phonological dependence does not form part of the definition of a weak pronoun (Cardinaletti and Starke, 1994: 21-22). Ph. Panaxiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 125 tential and [+th] Ds should occupy the two ends of a ‚specificity spectrum™, a situa- tion that usually would not offer itself to this sort of syncretism. 3.3. BrugP (1996) and Giusti (1997) Bruge (1996) and Giusti (1997) essentially follow, or have independently taken up, this line of reasoning: demonstratives start off from the lowest functional speci- fier, ‚AgrP™ for Giusti and ‚DemP™ for Bruge, within DP - the one just above NP, and raise to SpecDP by LF.9 Both Giusti and Bruge use Spanish to portray their claim: (20) la reaction alemana esa trpacci& a las criticas the reaction German this to the criticisms ‚this German reaction to criticism™ (lla) i nei afti katiki tis polis the new these inhabitants the-gen city-gen Notice here the similarities of (20) to (1 la), repeated above for convenience, although the noun has not raised in the Greek example (see Cinque, 1994 for partial N-raising in Romance). Like in Campbell, all demonstratives in all languages are XPs, either in their base position, or in SpecDP, or in some other unspecified intermediate position: Bruge (1996: 41-42) for Romanian and the p-A position of Greek, cf. Giusti (1997: 108), as well. Bruge, further elaborating (1996: 48-49), postulates that all demonstratives must, by LF, check their uninterpretable [Refl feature (in the spirit of Longobardi, 1994). Depending on the strength of the [Refj feature on the demonstrative we have: - Languages where [Refl is always strong, forcing movement. The result is DP-in positions invariably (English). - Languages where the demonstrative is always weak, staying in situ by Spell-Out - in what we dubbed p-N/p-A positions (Celtic, Hebrew). - Languages where the demonstrative can either be strong or weak, so both options are available (MG, Romanian, Serbo-Croatian). The presence or absence of an article in the DP depends on a language-specific parameter that bans or permits doubly-filled projections. So, Spanish does not permit both SpecDP and D to be filled at the same time, Greek does: lo (21) a. Este libro this book 9 See also Lyons (1999) for an analysis in this spirit. lo There are no details on whether this is an ‚on-off™ structural parameter. Should this be so, Spanish would permit doubly filled Comps but not doubly filled Dets, while MG would permit both. 126 Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 b. El libro este the book this C. *Este el libro this the book (22) a. *Afto vivlio this book b. To vivlio afto the book this c. Afto to vivlio this the book Because such a parameter does not state that in cases like (22a,c) both SpecDP and D must be filled, an additional hypothesis has to be made (Bruge, 1996: 8, 30-31) that the Ref feature of the demonstrative checked against that of D by LF is incom- patible with anything but a definite determiner. The combination of the doubly-filled D filter parameter with the obligatoriness of the definite article yields the desired results in (21) and (22). This model accounts for the cross-linguistic variation of demonstrative placing on the basis of whether the [Refl feature of the demonstrative XP is weak, strong or ambiguously specified. A first point is that this account inherits the assump- tion that English demonstratives are at SpecDP. A second is that the cross-lin- guistic typology relies on two independent parameters: strength of [Refl on the demonstrative and a ban on doubly-filled projections. The problem is that strength of [Refl ﬁshare[s] both the strong and the weak propertiesﬂ (Bruge, 1996: 49) in languages like MG; apart from its dubious theoretical status, a side effect of such a statement is that the choice between DP-ini and p-N/p-A is assumed to be optional (1996: 49), something not thoroughly compatible with what we saw in section 2.2. Finally, a parameter setting that permits doubly filled pro- jections (or Ds), does not necessarily entail that they must be doubly filled, as (22) illustrates. 4. An alternative analysis We have already seen that - semantically at least - the p-N and the p-A positions are identical and that they stand in complementary distribution (12). This assumption requires only a mild degree of idealisation, which would not amount to anything more than leaving aside the structures briefly dealt with in 2.1.4 and 2.1.5. A plausi- ble assumption that follows is that the choice between the p-N and the p-A positions is conditioned by some DP internal factor. Let™s suppose, along with Stavrou and Hot-rocks, Campbell, Brugi? and Giusti, that all the positions a demonstrative can occupy in MG are derived from the same base position. Let™s further adhere to the theoretical assumptions that no such thing as rightward movement (at least for phrases) exists (Kayne, 1994; Sportiche, 1995; Chomsky, 1995, and others). The natural consequence would be that the DP-ini Ph. Punagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-732 721 position is the result of movement of the demonstrative XP to the left, as all the analyses mentioned agree. A further claim I am going to make here is in line with Campbell, Giusti and Bruge™s idea that demonstratives (at least of the Greek sort) start off from some- where inside the DP, a lowest specifier. In fact, I am going to propose that the demonstrative in both the p-N and the p-A position is at the same position, namely the specifier where it is merged, the base position. Only the DP-ini position results from raising of the demonstrative. 4. I. The role of Num For this proposal to eventually make sense under current assumptions, we have to postulate an intermediate functional projection between D and N within DP. If DP and CP structures are, more or less parallel to each other and D is, in a way, equiv- alent to C (Szabolcsi, 1994: 216-218) then an intermediate functional projection parallel to Infl would not be conceptually unattractive. The case for an intermediate nominal projection seems to be quite popular, if not uncontroversial (Ritter, 1991, 1995; Rouveret, 1991; Haegeman, 1993; Szabolcsi, 1994 - among others). Let us assume, along with Ritter, Rouveret and Haegeman, that this functional head hosts at leust Number features (which do not form part of the lexical entry for N. like - arguably - gender). Let™s dub this functional head Num, as in Ritter (1991, 1995) and Rouveret (1991) while accommodating the possibility that - cross-linguistically - it might contain other features as well. Let us also assume that APs are specifiers of this projection (as in Stavrou, 1999). Ideally, the strength of Num could be correlated somehow with the rich morphology of Greek N, but I will abstain from making any more com- ments on this issue until section 5.1. ﬂ For the time being, suffice it to stipulate that Num in MG is strong. 4.2. Strength of Num and the p-Nip-A positions In order to account for the word order facts, the demonstrative can be generated in any specifier below NumP. In the face of the lack of any salient evidence for the presence of another functional projection there, let™s say this position is none other than some specifier of NP, either assuming multiple specifiers or a Larsonian shell for NP, cf. Bruge (1996). An Agr projection, as in Giusti (1997) would be problem- atic (should Agr projections exist at all) as it plays no other evident role than to pro- vide a position for the demonstrative: unlike the rest of Giusti™s DP-internal Agr projections, this one does not host APs but only the demonstrative (whichever its categorial status). I understand that it is hard to keep only the lowest SpecAgrP exclusively for demonstratives, unless this lowest Agr is in fact a new functional cate- gory with distinctive features. So, purely for the sake of exposition, let™s assume the ﬂ A review of the issues arising as well as a non-movement account of the various DP-internal word orders can be found in Alexiadou and Stavrou (1998). 728 Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 zero hypothesis that demonstratives are generated at SpecNP, glossing over the possi- bility of a more elaborate structuring within NP and the genuine problem of Q-assign- ment: again, demonstratives cannot easily be assumed to be e-marked by the noun.‚* Now, recall that Num is strong. This means that it bears a strong feature that must be checked by Spell Out by an appropriate checker. If an AP is merged at the Spec- NumP, a Spec-Head checking relation with the Num head is established; by hypoth- esis, the AP is an appropriate feature checker. Merge pre-empts Move, on Economy/ Last Resort grounds, so any other movement that would be triggered if the AP were not merged is not necessary, therefore banned (cf. Chomsky, 1995, among others). The p-A order is then derived by leaving the N in-situ; the strength of Num is the only trigger for N-movement inside DP in Greek, unlike Romance as described in Cinque (1994). (23) The p-A position DP P A i AP Num™ nei Num NP 4 H-,--K N DP I /\ katiki tis polis Before moving on to examine the derivation that results in the p-N positioning of the demonstrative, let us review the predictions (23) makes for our examples in sec- tion 2.1.3, repeated here for convenience: (11) a. i nei afti katiki tis polis the new these inhabitants the-gen city-gen b. *i nei katiki afti tis polis the new inhabitants these the-gen city-gen ‚these new inhabitants of the city™ ‚* Noguchi (1997: 781) also claims that Japanese demonstratives are in SpecNP; an anonymous Lin- gua reviewer comments that lack of O-marking of demonstratives by the noun suggests that they might originate in a lowest functional projection. Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 729 (11 b) is banned as it would involve the N kutiki moving to Num, although the AP nei is already merged at SpecNumP and has checked Num™s strong feature. No move- ment of N is needed; consequently any ‚doubly filled projection™ condition for Num would be superfluous.i3 At the same time, word order in grammatical (1 la) illus- trates that the demonstrative is merged indeed at a lowest specifier position, as in Giusti (1997). We also see that the genitive argument tis polis remains inside the NP (shell), lower than N (either in the complement of N or at the specifier of a light n). Now, if an AP is not merged at SpecNumP, then head-movement as a last resort applies. Num attracts the relevant feature of N and the whole formal and phonologi- cal feature matrix is pied-piped with it (as movement is overt): (24) Deriving the postnominal position (=9b) DP NumP Overt movement A plausible question is what this feature, present on all Num (in its strong ver- sion), the (head of) AP (probably weak) and N (apparently weak, the N does not have to move overtly in (23) where the AP does the checking of Num) is. I assume that it must be the categoriaf [N]feature. I4 As for why the demonstrative is assumed to be a DP, I defer discussion of this issue until section 4.4. Let us now re-examine the examples from section 2.1.2, repeated below, in the light of (24) and juxtapose them to (1 I) and the structure in (23). (9) a. i katiki tis polis the inhabitants the-gen city-gen I3 I wish to thank an anonymous Lingua reviewer for raising the issue of ‚doubly filled projection™ con- ditions. I4 As in Chomsky (1993, where T has a strong V-feature when overtly attracting the verb, and so on. 730 Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 b. i katiki afti tis polis the inhabitants these the-gen city-gen (9b) is particularly enlightening, especially compared to (11): the demonstrative ends up linearly adjacent to the genitive phrase tis polis, because N has moved over it and adjoined to Num. As (1 lb) illustrates, this is impossible if an adjective is pre- sent, ruling out the option of some ‚free™ adjunction for the demonstrative. Furthermore (9b) poses a considerable difficulty for analyses like that of Tsimpli and Stavrakaki (1999). Tsimpli and Stavrakaki assume demonstratives to be merged as a highest Def head that takes DP as its complement. Should this be so, (9b) would be derived by extraction of part of the DP (namely the D+N i kutiki) to a higher position (perhaps SpecDelP or SpecFocusP) and (1 la) by extracting the D+A constituent (?) i nei. Such operations would possibly require an analysis of simple DPs along the lines of the more complicated ones in section 2.1 S, that involve determiner spreading. More- over, extraposing phrasal constituents to high specifiers (SpecDefP or SpecFocusP) would result to marked interpretations, focused and/or topicalised, for the phrases involving demonstratives in p-N/p-A positions, but we have seen this not to be so: in fact, p-N/p-A positions are ‚weakly™ deictic with a mainly discourse anaphoric function. 4.3. The ‚definite™ article So far we have followed the ideas of Campbell (1996) Bruge (1996) and Giusti (1997) for demonstratives. We have only argued against Bruge and Giusti™s postula- tion of an intermediate position to accommodate p-A orders, claiming that these orders can independently be derived by the properties of MG Num and N heads. We now have to consider the DP-ini position of the demonstrative, the one in which it is used for either ostension to a real world object or to introduce a new topic in discourse. Revisiting Campbell™s th-criterion (19), we have the basis for an analy- sis of why and where exactly the demonstrative moves. Recast in minimalist terms, this analysis is going to provide us with insight with respect to the cross-linguistic variation of demonstrative occurrence inside DPs. Our account here builds on Bruge™s (1996) explanation of why demonstratives (do not) move, being at odds with it at the same time: in particular, departing from MG evidence I am going to claim that demonstrative movement should be captured as nothing else but the coun- terpart of wh-movement for DPs (as in Horrocks and Stavrou, 1987) and claim that not all demonstratives are XPs. 4.3.1. Three articles It is a well-known fact that such a thing as an ‚expletive definite article™ exists in quite a few languages. According to Longobardi (1994), this either heads DPs of proper nouns or generic DPs (arguably, both headed by an empty D in English).i5 Is Putting a hedge here, I quote Giannakidou and Stavrou (1999): in the case of generics they claim the article not to be ‚expletive™ but a contentful nominalization [semantic] operator which ﬁis the intension- Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 731 Here we will take the prototypical expletive article to be the one that heads proper name DPs. Consider Table 1: Table I ‚The dog™ and ‚the John™ Definite article Expletive article Standard Greek Northern Greek Catalan Fohr Frisian o skilos u skilus el gos di htlnj 0 Yanis i Yans en Joan u Hans Compare now the two columns of Table 1. The two forms of the article are identical in Standard Greek, although this is not necessarily so in other languages that possess both. Thus, we have di vs. a in Frisian, el vs. en in Catalan and, more importantly, u vs. i in the closely related Northern Greek variety exemplified.ﬂ In other words, in Standard Greek, there must be, at least, two different lexical entries for the article, as well: one of them, lacking the [Def(initeness)] feature.i8 Contrary to the implicit argument in Bruge™s account (1996: 8 and her footnote 9) it is not the expletive variety that shows up in DPs with demonstratives. Consider: (25) a. u skilus aftos b. *i skilus aftos the dog this c. El gos aquest d. *En gos aquest the dog this Northern Greek South and West Catalan In both cases, the fully fledged definite article (i.e. one bearing at least the [Defy fea- ture) co-occurs with the demonstrative, not the expletive place-holder. Now, if Bruge is correct in assuming that articles in constructions like (25) are inserted in order to bar existential interpretation - as is the case with proper names in the lan- alization of the t-operator: nominalized kinds are assimilated to individual concepts of some sortﬂ (1998: 27). In this case as well, it should indeed have a different feature make-up than the definite arti- cle proper. On the expletive D analysis for Greek, see Roussou and Tsimpli (1994). I6 Data for Northern Greek from Papadopoulos (1930: 5 1) drawn from the Kozani variety; for Frisian from Longobardi (1994: 663664). I7 The definite feminine form i is identical to the expletive masculine one. Nevertheless, given the his- tory of this ‚proper name™ article (IO Manolessou, p.c.) and that feminine is the marked gender in MG, one cannot assume this to be significant. I wish to thank a Lingua reviewer for raising this issue. Ix A Lingua reviewer proposes an alternative approach to Standard Modem Greek expletives, in the spirit of Manzini and Savoia (in press). According to it, ﬁa lexical element is interpreted as an expletive when it forms a chain/ordered pair with an associate, i.e. as the result of the derivation it occurs in. In other words the very same item can be interpreted differently depending on the derivationﬂ. 132 Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 guages in Table 1 - the choice of the definite variety against the expletive one is problematic. It seems that there is more to the article that co-occurs with demonstra- tives than this. Let us suppose that the article heading a DP with a demonstrative on its left periphery is not just the definite article but a ‚stronger™ version of it, in the sense that this D head encodes not only definiteness (in terms of the presence of a [DefJ fea- ture) but deixis, as well - say, a [Deic] feature. This [Deic] I take to be Campbell™s (1996) [+th]. Table 2 below illustrates this state of affairs: Table 2 A case for syncretism Expletive [cp] Definite [q, Defl Deictic [cp, Def, Deic] English Northern Greek Standard Greek i 0 the u 0 this, that u 0 Now, deictic D u and o - unlike this or, perhaps, French ce - is strong and must be checked before Spell Out. Consequently, it attracts the deictic operator in order for a Spec-Head checking relationship to be created and strength of the [Deic] to be checked and eliminated. A correlation between strength and morphological syn- cretism is to be attempted in section 5.1, (27) Deriving the DP initial position DP Overt movement katiki a tis polis Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 133 4.3.2. What about the p-N and p-A positions? Given the above analysis, where strength of a Deictic feature attracts the demon- strative operator to SpecDP, we are left for p-N and p-A positions to account for. Three solutions offer themselves. Perhaps, the feature that triggers the attraction, [Deic] for us and [Refl for Bruge, can be sometimes strong and sometimes weak in MG. Even if we directly correlated strength of the feature with ‚strength™ or ‚prominence™ of ostension, recall that DP-in positions are deictic and p-N/p-A ones discourse anaphoric, then we would still be short of a principled syntactic and semantic formulation of such a correlation. The solution looks hardly attractive (or even learnable), so I discard it without discussion. More interestingly, it could be that the article heading the DP with demonstratives in p-A/p-N position is just definite, one lacking the [Deic] feature in other words. As for its still obligatory presence - recall that *katiki afti is also ungrammatical - one could hypothesise covert raising of the demonstrative™s feature matrix (including [Deic]) to D by LF. Then, operator movement inside DPs might follow the pattern of wh-movement, in this case lexically parametrised (Wexler and Manzini, 1987; Ouhalla, 1991) within the same language. So, sometimes demonstrative movement would be overt, like wh-movement in English, sometimes covert, like wh-movement in Mandarin, as in Huang (1982). Unfortunately, under a checking model like that in Chomsky (1993, the postulation of a covert alternative to overt demonstrative movement would force us to stipulate the presence of a weak uninterpretable feature on either the operator or the D head, while we need only strength of a feature in order to motivate overt movement. It is not clear what an uninterpretable feature of either a definite article or a demonstrative operator that can stand alone could be. A third possibility is that demonstrative movement in MG is parallel to ﬁoptionalﬂ wh-movement in French. Compare (27) and (28): (27) a. Qui vous voyez tqu, ce soir? Who you see this evening b. Vous voyez qui ce soir? You see who this evening (28) a. Afti i nei tani katiki tis polis these the new inhabitants the-gen city-gen b. I nei afti katiki tis polis the new these inhabitants the-gen city-gen Mathieu (1999) convincingly argues against an LF-movement analysis for (27b). He shows that the best way to capture the contrast between (27a) and (27b) is to analyse (27b) as an instance of Move pre-empted by Merge. The lexical item merged is a null wh-operator. His analysis captures the subtle semantic differences (associated with scope) between (27a) and (27b) and also avoids problems related to the sup- posed inertia of subjacency in the case of covert movement, as wh-in situ in French can be blocked by a filled C or Neg. Carrying this analysis over to (28) has two advantages. First, we can claim that in both DP-ini and p-N/p-A positions the occurrence of a demonstrative operator is - in 734 Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 1 IO (2000) 717-742 a sense - licensed by a d&tic D head. In the case of a DP-ini demonstrative operator, the chain is the result of movement: Op...t,,. On the other hand, when the operator remains in situ (p-N/p-A position), the chain (a ‚CHAIN™19) is between an expletive null operator and the operator: Opexp.. . Op. Now, let us assume that the operator is read off as deictic only when it has scope over the D™ (DP according to Kayne™s, 1994 LCA) and as a discourse anaphoric element when it remains low, in the p-N/p-A position. The effect is essentially parallel to the difference of interpretations between the associate-in-subject position and the expletive-associate constructions respec- tively, as discussed in Chomsky (1995): (29) a. A man is t, man in the garden b. There is a man in the garden 4.4. The nature of the demonstrative As we have seen, the MG demonstrative aftos is a demonstrative operator; never- theless, its categorial status must be resolved. Giusti (1997) and Bruge (1996) seem to consider demonstratives (recall that they consider all of them phrasal) as a sort of adjective. This claim cannot be correct, though, even if we leave English demon- stratives aside (which we tacitly take in Table 2 to be D heads anyway), with their apparent morphological affinity to the article, namely their initial th-. Diachronically, ﬁa definite article [. . .] almost always derives from a distance or unmarked demonstrativeﬂ (Greenberg, 1991: 304). Well known examples include Latin demonstratives as the predecessors of Romance pronouns (Vincent, 1997), Ancient Greek articles developed from demonstratives, the recent development of a definite article from the demonstrative se in spoken varieties of Finnish (Chesterman, 1991; Laury, 1997) and so on. In fact, the shift from demonstrative to article is well attested in quite a few languages: it seems to be the first stage of the following diachronic ‚cycle™ (Greenberg, 1978, 1991): demonstrative + definite article + non- generic article + noun marker. If demonstratives were adjectives or adjective-like in at least some of the fifty or so languages that Greenberg (1978) takes into account, then perhaps other ‚adjective-like™ elements, like possessives, can undergo this cate- gorial shift into D heads. Nevertheless, possessive D heads are either non-existent (according to some analyses, including Giusti, 1997), or not as widespread as articles. Synchronically, if Bruge is correct in assuming that demonstratives carry a [Refl feature, then they could not possibly be adjectives - unless we are ready to radically reformulate Longobardi™s (1994) account in order to include adjectives as possible ‚referentiality™ checkers. We will then assume demonstrative operators to be DPs cross-linguistically, as demonstrative heads are Ds anyway. Moreover, it is perhaps the case that demon- strative operators have some internal structure, like it is assumed for (at least some) pronouns, see Postal (1969) Radford (1993), Cardinaletti and Starke (1994), Chom- sky (1995: 337) and Panagiotidis (1998). I9 In the sense of Chomsky (1986): a chain that links an expletive with its associate. Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 135 I will now attempt a sketchy analysis of Romanian and Macedonian data to illus- trate the close relationship between (deictic) D heads and demonstrative operators, as well as to illustrate the possibility of a language to possess both morphologically dis- tinct demonstrative heads and demonstrative operators. 4.4.1. Romanian Consider the following Romanian examples (from Bruge, 1996 and Giusti, 1997): (30) a. acest (frumos) teatru (frumos) this nice theatre b. *acest-ul teatru this-the theatre C. *acest tea&u-l this the-theatre d. teatru-1 acesta frumos theatre-the this-A nice Contrary to Bruge (1996) and Giusti (1997) let us assume acest to be a head in D position and acesta, bearing the distinct morpheme -a (ﬁa residual reduced form of a deictic adverbﬂ perhaps: Brugb, 1996: 41), a DP constituent. Now we can capture the fact that acest is in complementary distribution with affixal article -(u)l, where acesta is not. Recall that Cardinaletti and Starke (1994) have observed that ‚strong™ (i.e., XP) constituents tend to carry more morphology than their X0 counterparts, -a here could very well make the difference between a phrase and a head. Nevertheless, even if we assume this novel idea, there are still loose ends: why acesta cannot move over APs, like afios? Is this a deictic variant of -ul in (30d)? Where is acesta? On the other hand, adhering to the standard analysis of Bruge (1996) and Giusti (1997) leaves even more questions unanswered, such as why acest - in SpecDP - never co-occurs with -ul while acesta - never in SpecDP - invariably does? Why Romanian possesses two forms (acest and acesta) of demonstratives if both are XPs and mean the same?*O Where is acesta? 4.4.2. Macedonian Macedonian also seems to possess both Do (either identical to articles or zeroes) and DP (31) a. b. demonstratives: *™ ovoj 0 ostrov this island ovoj moj-ov ostrov this my-the island ‚this island of mine™ *O Niq Voicu, p.c. ?™ I am grateful to Vane Milanov and Vladimir V. Gagachev for the data, grammaticality judgements and helpful comments. 136 Ph. Panagiojidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 c. onoj sini-on cvet that blue-the flower ‚that blue flower™ We can tentatively consider ovoj and onoj to be demonstrative operators in the Spec of a null D head. It also seems that some element (adjective or possessive) is required to support affixal articles -ov and -on as things like *ovuj-ov and *onoj-on are really bad. So far, there is nothing interesting: ovoj and onoj are specifiers and the article in Macedonian seems to attract neads to cliticise on from lower positions within DP invariably (Tomic, 1996). What is interesting is the paradigm of the Macedonian article: ﬁMacedonian has a system of definite article clitics which exhibit triple spatial differentiation. There are actually three sets of definite article clitics: t-, v- and n-. The members of the t-set refer to non-present objects, as well as present objects which are proximate to the addressee [. . .] the members of the v-set refer to present objects which are proximate to the speaker [ . ..I whereas the members of the n-set refer to present objects which are remote from both the speaker and the addressee [...Iﬂ (Tomic, 1996: 513) The morphological affinity to demonstrative operators ovoj and onoj is apparent, actually this is where Macedonian articles developed from (Andrew Spencer, p.c.). Expectedly, articles of the t-set, referring to non-present objects, have no demonstra- tive operator equivalent and can never be demonstrative. The tripartite division of the paradigm seems to be the result of fusing together the demonstrative D para- digms (v- and n-sets) with pure articles (t-set). 22 The result is that v- and n-sets can now have the ‚this/that™ distinction either as articles or as demonstrative Ds. 4.5. Summary Concluding, instead of assuming a ‚demonstrative-in-Spec™ analysis for all lan- guages, including those in (1) as Campbell (1996), Brugb (1996) and Giusti (1997) do, we assume that the locus of deixis, a [Deic] feature, is indeed always a D: this, ceftte), o. If this happens to be strong (as with the Greek deictic article), an operator, overt or covert, is required at SpecDP to check it. If not, it just heads the DP with- out any further surface effects. In this way, we do not have to postulate a Greek-like machinery for the straightforward cases of English or French. Of course, in lan- guages like Spanish, Catalan or Macedonian, as in (31a), the deictic D can be phono- logically null. Now, demonstrative reinforcers (Bernstein, 1997) or locative adverbs (Bruge, 1996) provide evidence that demonstratives in languages in (1) here assumed to be heads, originate from a lower position. Indeed, Bernstein™s (1997) analysis for these demonstratives involves head movement of the demonstrative to D (1997: 92-97): the locus of deixis is still D. In other words, even if demonstratives like this and ce originated from a lower position, they could still be claimed to be heads: in princi- 22 Although these also were developed from Slavonic demonstratives (Andrew Spencer, p.c.). Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 731 ple, there is nothing that would make us entail demonstrative movement to be solely XP-movement. I will have little more to offer on this issue here (see also footnote 27). 5. Further implications Apart from any language-specific interest the above analysis might have, I think that it also raises some theoretically interesting points as well. A first one has already been mentioned, namely the assumption that deixis is encoded on a D head univer- sally. Thus we do away with a ‚doubly-filled D filter™ kind of descriptive account of the ungrammaticality of (3), an inevitable consequence of a generalised ‚Demonstra- tive-in-Spec™ analysis (see section 3) in the face of such data: deixis is encoded on thislce, a D, and for some grammars this is enough. This is a welcome result, as fil- ters are descriptive generalisations with no real explanatory usefulness. Second, we show that no need for an intermediate position23 is required for demonstrative operators, they are either in their base position (represented by the p- N/p-A position in Greek) or at SpecDP. Third, we reconfirm the parallelism between the movement of wh-operators inside CP and the movement of demonstrative operators inside DP. The exact semantic role of a demonstrative operator, wherever available, remains yet to be explored in fur- ther research. Fourth, we offer some more evidence on the correlation between strength and morphology. We are going to discuss this issue in a somehow more detailed fashion below. 5.1. Strength and visibility The idea in Chomsky (1995) that morphology drives overt movement is not novel. In fact, it has received much attention and has been the object of debate for a long time. Throughout this paper, and especially in section 4.3.1, a vague correlation between strength and syncretism of determiner morphology has been suggested. In an informally descriptive fashion, the idea could now be stated along the following lines: the deictic D heads this and that are not strong, this being a consequence of their being distinct from the. The interpretable [Deic] feature on this/that is expressed via their morphology and these deictic Ds can be distinguished from def- inite D the at the level of PF. On the other hand, the deictic D o is identical to the definite D o; consequently, the former is strong so that morphological syncretism does not prevent its semantic function (deixis, ostension) from being made manifest at PF. This idea, far from being original, is at odds with the standard view where ‚mor- phological richness (of the paradigm)™ entails ‚strength™ of a head. For instance, in 23 Pace Romanian acesfa, as in (30d). 738 Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 Rohrbacher (1999) and Vikner (1997) the strength of Infl/AgrS depends on its mor- phological richness: if it is rich enough it is strong and it can trigger V to I move- ment. Contrasting to such a view, we tentatively point towards formulating a notion of strength closer to the conception of grammar as possessing two mechanisms to make LF interpretable features visible at PF: morphology and movement (cf. Jelinek, 1984; Baker, 1988, 1996; Ouhalla, 1994; Roberts and Roussou, 1999). In other words, strength is ultimately PF related. 24 A clearer formulation of these ideas can perhaps be spelled out by way of Thrainsson (1996: 261) where the following Real Minimalist Principle (RMP) is argued for: (32) Assume only those functional categories you have evidence for. RMP is assumed to be a sort of cognitive heuristic mechanism that conditions learn- ability and, thus, the presence of a functional category in individual grammars. Evi- dence for a functional category25 is present either when it is morphologically marked in some manner or when it triggers movement. For our purposes here, let us assume that RMP holds indeed. Let us also make a further stipulation, namely that RMP is not only a heuristic device to tell between presence vs. absence of a functional head but, also, between presence vs. absence of an LF-interpretable feature on a given functional head. For the sake of exhibition, take a language like English: the complementiser that has its feature make-up made visible by virtue of its form; on the other hand, a [Q] feature on a zero C would vio- late modified RMP if weak because there also exists a lexical entry of a null C not bearing a [Q] feature, namely, the null variant of that. That is why a C marked for [Q] is strong. Strength must be eliminated before Spell-Out either by Merge or Move not movement only, as the usual assumption is. In this way, the presence of this LF interpretable [Q] feature on C will become visible at PF as well. In other words, strength takes over where morphology fails. We thus take modified RMP to (be one of the factors that) control the distribution of strong features on lexical entries of functional categories, a distribution which would otherwise be free and/or arbitrary. Let us assume that strength is a special kind of categorial feature on functional heads only and that it can be satisfied by either Merge or Move - both assumptions from Chomsky (1995). Substantive lexi- cal entries will never need a strong feature, as their interpretable features (by hypoth- esis, substantives bear only interpretable features) are marked by their stem. Let us see now how our assumptions above apply to our data. A form like North- em Greek u is ambiguous between a lexical entry with a [Deic] and one without a [Deic] feature: morphology does not distinguish between the deictic and the definite 24 More accurately, Morphology related, assuming Morphology to be somewhere between Spell Out and PF and objects such as CHAINS to be (still) visible at Morphology: we will claim in that a null expletive (forming a CHAIN with an associate) can check a strong feature. I am grateful to a Lingua reviewer for discussing this issue. See also discussion in Chomsky (1995) and Lasnik (1999). *™ Crucially, Thrainsson only assumes a UG directory of features and not universality of functional cat- egories. I will remain agnostic with respect to the relevant debate here. Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 739 D here. In order for modified RMP to be satisfied, the only way to tell between them at PF is to have one (the deictic version, which carries the ‚marked™ extra feature [Deic]) assigned a strong feature that will cause either Merge or Move to apply. Sim- ilarly, MG Num, being morphologically invisible (as it is null, at least in a lexicalist version of things), is also assigned a strong feature, so as to gain the ‚support™ of either an AP (recall that MG adjectives agree in number) merged in its Spec or the moved N head-adjoined during the derivation. We can hardly claim that our modified version of RMP is anything but a rough sketch towards a principle that will ultimately render the distribution of strong fea- tures in grammar both non-arbitrary and dependent on interface conditions, a con- ceptually desirable consequence. Formulation of other possible principles towards the same effect, as well as refinement and further discussion of the validity, range and implications of modified RMP are open to further research and beyond the scope of this paper. 5.2. A typology Concluding our inquiry, let us now review the possible configurations in which a [Deic] feature is realised in the light of our modified RMP. a. The D head bearing a [Deic] feature has a morphologically distinct entry: this and that arguably exemplify this, Romanian acest as well, if the account in sec- tion 4.4.1 is correct. b. The D head bearing a [Deic] feature is either null or morphologically identical to D heads with different feature specification. In order for modified RMP to be satisfied, those heads must be strong. This eventually results to chain-formation, with the head of the chain in the checking domain of D. Let us now look into different subcases for b. above: D is overt, identical to some other D head, a chain Op.. . top is formed by Spell Out where Strength is satisfied by Move. Example: ufti i kutiki (MG). D is overt, identical to some other D head, a chain Op_...Op is formed where Strength is satisfied by Merge and CHAIN formation follows.26 Example: Op,., i katiki afti (MG), Op,,, an fear seo (Irish), Op,,, ef hombre este (Spanish). D is null, a chain Op.. . top is formed by Spell Out where Strength is satisfied by Move. Example: ovoj e ostrov (Mac.), este e hombre (Spanish). D is null, a chain Op exp.. .Op is formed where Strength is satisfied by Merge and CHAIN formation follows. Such an option seems available for languages that completely lack articles, like Kiswahili (from Giusti, 1997: 112):*™ 26 Apparently, Celtic languages, like Irish here have only the option of merging a null expletive oper- ator, so the ostensive vs. discourse anaphoric operator (as discussed in 4.3.2) should not be attainable. *™ For the sake of completeness, we should note here that French seems to be a language which has a null deictic D, like these in the subcase. above, but satisfies modified RMP by head movement of ce 740 Ph. Panagiotidis / Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 (33) shati langu zuri hili shirt my good this Residual issues such as why overt D and demonstrative operator at SpecDP is not an option in Spanish or why deictic D must be ‚supported™ by anything but a noun (phrase) in Macedonian (cf. 31b-c) are perhaps reducible to morphological proper- ties of the lexical items in question. References Abney, Steven P., 1987. The English noun phrase in its sentential aspect. Ph.D. Thesis. Cambridge, MA: MIT. Alexiadou, Artemis and Elena Anagnostopoulou, 1998. Parametrizing AGR: Word order, V-movement and EPP-checking. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 16,491-539. Alexiadou, Artemis and Melita Stavrou, 1998. On the relation between ‚strength™ and morphological richness: Crosslinguistic asymmetries in noun movement. Manuscript, ZAS, Berlin. Alexiadou, Artemis and Chris Wilder, 1998. Adjectival modification and multiple determiners. In: A. Alexiadou and C. Wilder (eds.), Possessors, predicates and movement in the Determiner Phrase, 305-332. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Androutsopoulou, Antonia, 1996. The licensing of adjectival modification. Proceedings of WCCFL 14, 17-31. Baker, Mark, 1988. Incorporation: A theory of grammatical function changing. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Baker, Mark, 1996. The polysynthesis parameter. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Bernstein, Judy B., 1997. Demonstratives and reinforcers in Romance and Germanic languages. Lingua 102, 87-l 13. Campbell, Richard, 1996. Specificity operators in SpecDP. Studia Linguistica 50, 161-188. Cardinaletti, Anna and Michael Starke, 1994. The typology of structural deficiency: A case study of the three classes of pronouns. Manuscript, University of Venice. Chesterman, Andrew, 1991. On definiteness: A study with special reference to English and Finnish. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Chomsky, Noam, 1986. Knowledge of Language. New York: Praeger. Chomsky, Noam, 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Cinque, Guglielmo, 1994. On the evidence of partial N-movement in the Romance DP. In: G. Cinque, J. Koster, J.-Y. Pollock, L. Rizzi, R. Zanuttini (eds.), Paths towards Universal Grammar, 85-110. Washington DC: Georgetown University Press. Giannakidou, Anastasia and Melita Stavrou, 1999. Nominalization and ellipsis in the greek DP. The Lin- guistic Review, 16, 295-331. Giusti, Giuliana, 1997. The categorial status of determiners. In: L. Haegeman (ed.), The new compara- tive syntax, 95-123. London: Longman. Greenberg, Joseph H., 1978. How does a language acquire Gender Markers? In: J. Greenberg, C. Fer- guson, E. Moravcsik (eds.), Universals of human language, vol. 3: Word structure, 47-82. Stanford, KY: Stanford University Press. Greenberg, Joseph, 1991. The last stages of grammatical elements: Contractive and Expansive dese- manticization. In: E. Traugott and B. Heine (eds.), Approaches to Grammaticalization 2, 301-314. Amsterdam: Benjamins. from a lower position. See Bernstein (1997) for an account. As for English this and that, no such evi- dence seems to exist. Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 741 Haegeman, Liliane, 1993. The morphology and distribution of object clitics in West Flemish. Studia Lin- guistica 47, 57-94. Horrocks, Geoffrey and Melita Stavrou, 1987. Bounding theory and Greek syntax: Evidence for wh- movement in NP. Journal of Linguistics 23, 79-108. Huang, C.-T. James, 1982. Move wh in a language without wh-movement. Linguistic Review 1, 369419. Jelinek, Eloise, 1984. Empty categories, case and configurationality. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 2, 39-74. Karanassios, G., 1992. Syntaxe comparee du groupe nominal en Grec Modeme et dans d™autres langues. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Paris VIII-Vincennes. Kayne, Richard, 1994. The antisymmetry of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Kester, Ellen-Petra, 1996. The nature of adjectival inflection. Utrecht: OTS. Lasnik, Howard, 1999. On feature strength: Three minimalist approaches to overt movement. Linguistic Inquiry 30, 197-217. Laury, Ritva, 1997. Demonstratives in interaction: The emergence of a definite article in Finnish. Ams- terdam: Benjamins. Longobardi, Giuseppe, 1994. Reference and proper names: A theory of N-movement in syntax and log- ical form. Linguistic Inquiry 25, 609-665. Lyons, Christopher, 1999. Definiteness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Manolessou, IO and Phoevos Panagiotidis, 1999. Ta dhiktika tis ellinikis ke i shetikes epiplokes [Greek demonstratives and the relevant complications]. In: S.L. Tsoxatzidis, M. Koutita, A. Haralambopou- 10s (eds.), Studies in greek linguistics: Proceedings of the 19th Annual Meeting of the Department of Linguistics, Faculty of Philosophy, 199-212. Thessaloniki: Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. Manzini, Maria-Rita and Leonardo Savoia, in press. Parameters of subject inflection in Italian dialects. In: Peter Svenonius (ed.), Subjects, expletives and the EPP. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Mathieu, Eric, 1999. French WH in situ and its restrictions. Manuscript, UCL. Ouhalla, Jamal, 1991. Functional categories and parametric variation. London: Routledge. Ouhalla, Jamal, 1994. The syntactic representation of arguments. Unpublished lecture. Berlin: ASG, Max-Planck Gesellschaft. Panagiotidis, Phoevos, 1998. The internal structure of English pronouns. In: Stella Lambropoulou (ed.), Proceedings of the 12th International Symposium on Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, vol. 1, 8494. Thessaloniki: Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. Panagiotidis, Phoevos, in preparation. Pronominals and empty nouns heads. Ph.D. thesis, University of Essex. Papadopoulos, Stylianos, 1930. Grammatiki ton vorion idiomaton [Grammar of the Northern Dialects]. Athens: Glossiki Eteria. Philippaki-Warburton, Irene, 1985. Word order in Modem Greek. Transactions of the Philological Soci- ety, 113-143. Postal, Paul, 1969. On so-called ‚pronouns™ in English. In: D. Reibel and S. Schane (eds.), Modem Stud- ies in English, 210-224. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Radford, Andrew, 1993. Head-hunting: On the trail of the nominal Janus. In: G. Corbett,N. Fraser; S. McGlashan (eds.), Heads in grammatical theory, 73-l 13. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Ritter, Elizabeth, 1991. Two functional categories in noun phrase: Evidence from Modem Hebrew. In: S. Rothstein (ed.), Perspectives on phrase structure: Heads and licensing, 3762. New York: Acade- mic Press. Ritter, Elizabeth, 1995. On the syntactic category of pronouns and agreement. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 13, 405443. Roberts, Ian and Anna Roussou, 1999. A formal approach to grammaticalisation. Linguistics 37, 1011-1041. Rohrbacher, Bernhard Wolfgang, 1999. Morphology-driven syntax: A theory of V to I raising and pro- drop. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Roussou, Anna and Tsimpli, Ianthi-Maria, 1994. On the interaction of case and definiteness in Modem Greek. In: I. Philippaki-Warburton, K. Nicolaidis and M. Sifianou (eds.), Themes in Greek linguis- tics, 69-76. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 142 Ph. Panagiotidis I Lingua 110 (2000) 717-742 Rouveret, Alain, 1991. Functional categories and agreement. Linguistic Review 8, 353-387 Sportiche, Dominique, 1995. Sketch of a reductionist approach to syntactic variation and dependencies. In: H. Campos and P. Kempchinsky (eds.), Evolution and revolution in linguistic theory, 356-398. Washington DC: Georgetown University Press. Stavrou, Melita, 1996. Adjectives in Modem Greek: An instance of predication, or an old issue revisited. Journal of Linguistics 32, 79-l 12. Stavrou, Melita, 1999. The position and serialization of APs in the DP: Evidence from Greek. In: Artemis Alexiadou, G. Horrocks, M. Stavrou (eds.), Studies in Greek Syntax, 201-225. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Stavrou, Melita and Geoffrey Horrocks, 1989. Enklitikes ke dhiktikes antonimies mesa stin OF [Enclitic and demonstrative pronouns inside NP]. Proceedings of the 10th Annual Meeting of the Department of Linguistics, Faculty of Philosophy, 225-243. Thessaloniki: Aristotle University of Thessaloniki. Szabolcsi, Anna, 1994. The noun phrase. In: F. Kiefer and K. Kiss (eds.), The syntactic structure of Hungarian (Syntax and Semantics 27), 179-274. New York: Academic Press. Thrainsson, Hoskuldur, 1996. On the (non)universality of functional categories. In: W. Abraham (ed.), Minimal ideas: Syntactic studies in the minimalist framework, 253-281. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Tomic, Olga MiSeska, 1996. The Balkan Slavic nominal clitics. In: A. Halpem and A. Zwicky (eds.), Approaching second: Second position clitics and related phenomena, 51 l-535. Stanford, CA: CSLI. Tsimpli, Ianthi-Maria, 1990. The clause structure and word order of Modem Greek. UCL Working Papers in Linguistics 2, 226-255. Tsimpli, Ianthi-Maria and Stavroula Stavrakaki, 1999. The effects of a morphosyntactic deficit in the determiner system: The case of a Greek SLI child. Lingua 108, 31-85. Vikner, Sten, 1997. Vﬂ-to-I0 movement and inflection for person in all tenses. In: L. Haegeman (ed.), The new comparative Syntax, 189-213. London: Longman. Vincent, Nigel, 1997. The emergence of the D-system in Romance. In: A. van Kemenade and N. Vin- cent (eds.), Parameters of morphosyntactic change, 149-169. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Wexler, Kenneth and M. Rita Manzini, 1987. Parameters and learnability in binding theory. In: T. Roeper and E. Williams (eds.), Parameter setting, 77-89. Dordrecht: Reidel. 