ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001) 131-155 Linsua www elsevier nl/locate/hngua Book review Review of Alain Rouveret, ed., Etre et avoir: syntaxe, semantique, typologie, Presses Universitaires de Vincennes, U. de Paris VIII, 1998 1. Introduction "l~tre et avoir" is an extremely stimulating book. It contains eight analyses of the verb ~tre by generative and generativist-compatible European linguists working on Latin, Portuguese, Italian, English, Comorian, Georgian and Hebrew. Each article contibutes new empirical data and a new, well-argued, often provocative hypothesis to account for the data in the framework of Universal Grammar. In addition, Alain Rouveret provides a superb introductory chapter. His concise yet complete account of the relevant twentieth-century literature allows the special- ist to review and the beginner to learn the major issues raised by the grammar of the verb BE. I also found Rouveret's elegant, somewhat formal, French style a refresh- ing contrast to the generally colorless English of the typical generativist article. The advantage of choosing a single theme, here essentially the verb BE, is that the same theoretical hypotheses can be tested with respect to different language families, in this book the Romance, Caucasian, Bantu, and Semitic families. It is a pity there is nothing on German or Dutch, which unlike English, but like Latin, Italian and Por- tuguese, have two verbs BE, yet belongs to a non-Romance language family. Certain hypotheses due to Benveniste, Couquaux and Stowell, and Moro recur throughout the book. ^ 1.1. In "Etre et avoir dans leurs fonctions lingmstlques", Benvemste (1966, p. 197) formulated, wrt examples like (1) and (2), the now-famous observation: "avoir n'est rien d'autre qu'un ~tre dl inverse" (avoir is nothing but an inverted ~tre ~). (1) mihi est liber I I DAT NOM to me is book (i.e. I have a book) 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Scwnce B.V All nghts reserved PII S0024-3841 (00)00021-8 132 BooL levteu /Lingua 111 (2001) 131-155 (2) pro habeo hbrum I [ NOM ACC I have a book 1.2 Benvenlste also noted the fundamental grammatical affinity in certain languages between expressions of possession and perfect structures, as in Classical Armenian (3)-(4) (3) nora tun 6 (p. 201) hls-GEN house is (he has a house) (4) nora teseal e hls-GEN seen is (he has seen) In this book, both Montaut and Mahajan point out that in Hmdl, possessive struc- tures like (3) and perfect structures like (4) manifest the typological properties of ergativity: the subject has oblique case while the syntactic patient has nominative case And typically, the language lacks the verb avotr. 1 3 Couquaux (1981) and Stowell (1981) independently proposed that BE is a rais- ing verb It selects a small clause (sc) of the form [NP XP] lacking verb and tense morphemes. A canomcal predicahonal copula sentence is derived by raising the sub- ject of the small clause to the matrix subject position. (5) a e T BE [,~ John my best friend] b John, T BE [,~ t, my best friend] c. John is my best friend. 1 3 Moro (1988, 1991) proposed that mverse copula sentences like (6b) are derived by raising the predtcate rather than the sublect of the small clause m (5a). (6) a. My best friendj T BE [John tj] b. My best friend is John. In the next section, we summarize and comment on the articles in the book. We then conclude with an overwhelmingly positive appraisal and one or two regrets 2. The articles Following a brief 'Pr6sentahon', Rouveret's prehminary chapter 'Points de vue sur le verbe ~tre', provides theorehcal background. The basic problem for the analysis of ETRE is how to account for the fact that the same syntactic structure containing the verb BE is open to a variety of interpre- Book revtew/ Lingua 111 (2001) 131-155 133 tations, in particular to the predwative interpretation (7) and the identity interpreta- tion (8). (7) a. Le livre est sur l'rtagrre. The book is on the shelf b. Bruno est professeur. Bruno is (a) teacher (8) a. Le meilleur ami d'Hamlet est Horatio. The best friend of Hamlet is Horatio. b. L'dtoile du matin est Vrnus. The morning star is Venus. Rouveret summarizes the contributions of the major linguists who have addressed this and related problems. Meillet (1934) raised the question whether the copula was a true predicate (in cur- rent terms, a lexical morpheme), or simply an 'accessory' to the predicate (i.e. an inflectional morpheme). In addition to analyzing avolr as an inverted ~tre ~, Benveniste (1952, 1966) pro- posed that both the Armenian perfect nora gorceal d (genitive-his done is, he had done) and Latin habeo factum ('I have done') are structurally related to the simple possessive form in the languages. Benveniste also distingmshed structures expressing 'possession', where the pos- sessor is marked DATIVE and the possessed object is necessarily indefinite, as in Latin "est patri meo domus" (is to my father house - My father has a house), from those expressing "appartenance" (belongmg), where the possessed object is [+defi- nite] and the GENITIVE possessor is part of the predicate:: "haec domus patris mei est" (this house is my father's). Freeze (1992) and Kayne (1993) interpreted Benveniste's statement about avoir as an inverted ~tre ~ as a syntactic program. Freeze (1992) proposed that the abstract locative P of a belong-type sentence incorporates in syntax to ~tre, deriving avotr (with the object of P raising to subject position). (9) a. ETRE [XP DPtheme P DP] e 1 is a book P I b. DP P+ETRE DPthem e [+loc] I John has a book [+loc] [+hu] John 134 Book review / Lingua Ill (2001) 131-155 For Kayne P is the head of a DP/CP complement of copula BE Under certain conditions P raises to and merges with BE, again deriving HAVE. (10) e ETRE [DP/CP D,/P[AgrP DPpo~ Agr QP/NP,h .... ] i [ John a book I John, P + 6tre tp I John has a book Both authors treat P as a syntactic head which functions as an applicative mor- pheme when merged with BE. However, such syntactic "downgrading' within a derivation may be considered a violation of mclustveness (Chomsky, 1998). The change from lexxcal head to functional morpheme is a typical example of the gram- mattcahzation process which identifies a transition from one stage of grammar to another. As a dlachronlc change, the shift from head to applicative morpheme requires only a relabelling of the categonal feature of P in the lexicon. But within a derivation the same change requires either pruning a labelled node, the PP oi" CP which P projects in (9) and (10), or else the creation of an incoherent chain linking an apphcative morpheme to a syntactic head. Alternatively, P m (9) and (10) may be a syntacncally underdetermined, its [+loci feature construed in LF as a syntactic head in sltu and as an applicative morpheme under merger. But this alternative erases the distinction between features and cate- gories. If a [+loc] F may be construed as either a syntactic head or a bound mor- pheme, what prevents other FFs such as gender, lexical class, [+/-definite], [+/-hon- orific] or [+/-human] from projecting syntactic categories as well ~ Such a powerful mechanism needs independent arguments m its favor Benveniste also discussed the use of ~tre as both copula and stative verb of exis- tence. The two construals may be associated with the same verb, like French ~tre, or with two different verbs, such as Irish copula is vs existence verb ta. Both Benvenlste and Hjelmslev (1948) raised the issue of predicative vs identifi- cational BE. Higglns (1973) later identified four rather than two construals of BE based on the referential status of the pre- and post- verbal nominal (11) I Predlcattonal: I1 Ident~cattonal: III Spec~cattonal: IV Identity: a. b. Pierre est intelligent Pierre is intelligent Horatio est le medleur ami d'Hamlet Horatio is Hamtet's best friend Cet homme est Alfredo Funoll This man is A.F. Le mellleur am1 d'Hamlet est Horatio Hamlet's best friend is Horatio. L'6toile du soir est l'6toile de matin The evening star is the morning star Book revtew/ Lmgua 111 (2001) 131-155 135 Rouveret goes on to define some terms introduced by the modem semantic litera- ture on BE: O) strong vs weak interpretations of pronouns and determiners (Milsark, 1977) (ii) stage level vs individual level predicates (Carlson, 1977) (iii) specifymg or localising predicates vs all other predicates. (il) and (iii) combined account for contrasts such as (12a) vs (12b). In order for an indefinite NP to be subject of a predication, not only must the predicate be stage- level, it must also be 'specifying' (Kleiber, 1981) or 'localising' (Dobrovie-Sonn, 1997). (12) a. * Du beurre etait breton. Ł Butter was from Brittany. b. Du beurre 6tait en train de fondre sur la table. Butter was melting on the table (iv) thetic vs categoric judgements (Kuroda 1972, 1995). In the categoric sen- tence (13a), a predicate applies to an argument whose existence is presupposed. In the thetic sentence (13b), the existence of the corresponding nominal is not presup- posed but asserted. (13) a. Jean 6tait intelligent/malade John was intelligent/sick b. I1 y a des enfants dans la cour There are children in the yard. Finally, Rouveret turns to the standard syntactic analysis of BE as an unaccusative raising verb selecting a small clause [NP XP], and Moro's proposal that inverse cop- ula sentences are derived by raising the sc predicate as in (14b) rather than the sc subject as in (14a). (14) a. John is [t my best friend] b. My best friend is [John t] The ungrammaticality of (15b) constitutes a problem for Moro's hypothesis. (15) a. John is a doctor. b. * A doctor is John. Rouveret here refers to Gu6ron (1994a) who attributes the contrast between (14b) and (15b) to the Functional Definition of Categories (Gu6ron and Hoekstra, 1988): a nominal is construed at LF as an argument if it is case marked but as a predicate if it is T-marked (i.e. governed by Tense or by a T-marked auxiliary). A nominal sc predicate which raises to subject position is not T-marked at the level of interpreta- tion. It must therefore be construable as one of the semantic types which normally 136 Boo~ lewew / Lingua III (2001) 131-155 occupy subject position. With copular verbs, the raised predicate must be constru- able as a quantifying expression which picks out an element from a set of elements. This semantic condition is satisfied in (14b), which implies a set of friends, but not in (15b). 1 Rouveret points out that sentences like (15b) are grammatical in Welsh and in Hebrew, and attributes the contrast in grammaticality to different landing sites" while the predicate nominal raises to Spec IP in English and French. it raises to the less constrained Spec CP positron In Welsh and Hebrew If Moro's raising hypothesis is correct, all BE sentences contain an underlying small clause of the form [NP XP]. Higgins" identlficatlonal BE. class I1, and specifi- cational BE, class III, then reduce to the reverse copula structure. Do H~ggtn's tden- tity sentences, class IV, also reduce to the reverse copula? Rouveret cites Heycock and Kroch (1996), who claim, on the basis of examples like (16), that identity sentences, with both nominals referentml, allowing inversion of subject and predicate, constitute a primitive sentence type (16) a. L6on Bronstein est Trotsky b. Your opinion of Edinburgh is my opinion of Philadelphia. Such sentences do not have the properties of predications. Whereas a predicate can be pronomlnahsed by le in French ('Jean l'est, mon mexlleur ami" - John is it, my best friend), the post-verbal nominal in (16) cannot ("* L6on Bronsteln l'est, Trotsky). Identity sentences have rather the properties of inverse copulas: nothing can be extracted from the second nominal. And they cannot be embedded (of. (17)). (17) a. * I consider [my only friend my dog]. b. * I consider [your opinion of Edinburgh my opinion of Philadelphia]. Heycock and Kroch argue that since identity sentences exist independently, the simplest grammar would classify the inverse copula and similar specificatlonal sen- tences as identity structures, rather than derive them by predicate raising It as not certam, however, that identity sentences exist at the level of sentence grammar. Many sentences whmh look like identity statements fall the test of reversibility of nominals. (18) a. 2+21s4 b. "4ts2+2. This also seems to me to be true of the sentences of (16). Compare (15b) (= (1)) with grammatical (11) (Heycock, p c ) (1) * A good doctor is John (11) ONE good doctor is John Book review / Langua 111 (2001) 131-155 137 (19) a. Your opinion of Edinborough is my opinion of Philadelphia. b. ? ? My opinion of Philadelphia is your opinion of Edinborough. It is hard to avoid construing a pre-copula nominal as a presupposed entity and a post-copula nominal as predicating new information of this entity. (16a) may be con- sidered a predication comparable to (20a-b), in which the subject functions as what Fauconnier (1992) calls a value (individual evaluated in the discourse world) and the object functions as a role (individual evaluated in a world dependent on the real world). (20) a. Leon Bronstein is (plays the role of) Trotsky (in the political arena). b. Richard Burton is (plays the role of) Caesar (in this movie). (21) a. Trotsky is (* plays the role of) Leon Bronstein. b. Julius Caesar is (* plays the role of) Richard Burton. Suppose identity sentences do exist, on some level of grammar, z Rouveret's dis- cussion of predicate raising to CP in Welsh and Heycock's discussion of predicate- fronting in English below show that raismg a predicate to Spec-CP is independently motivated in the grammar. If so, what could possibly prevent a predicate which hap- pened to be nominal from raising to Spec IP rather than Spec CP, to satisfy the EPP F of T? If nothing prevents it, then the inverse copula can be derived by predicate raising independently of the existence of Identity structures. Rouveret recalls the 'Mapping hypothesis' of Diesing (1992), according to which the subject of a temporary or stage-level predicate is located within the VP while that of a permanent or individual-level predicate is located higher in the structure. Heim (1992) proposed that a stage-level predicate defines a variable saturated by a default existential operator. Rouveret suggests that one function of BE is to support the exis- tential operator. Rouveret also refers to his (1996) analysts of BE in Welsh. Welsh has two verbs be, mae, used in expressions of existence, possession, belonging, and with stage level pre&cates, and bod the copula. Rouveret (1996) suggests that mae is derived syntactically by mcorporation of copula bod to a locative clltlC. 2 (1) 1S a true identity sentence, with freely reverted nominals (Ora Matushansky, p C ) (11) My neighbor, whom I don't know personally, Is the wanner, who walked away wath 3000 dol- lars (a0 The wanner, who walked away wath 300 dollars, as my neaghbor, whom I don't know personally. W'lthout two non-restrlctave clauses, we return to asymmetrac predacatave (ala) and reverse 0v) sentences 0il) My neaghbor, whom I don' know personally, is the wanner. (canonacal) 0v) TRhe winner as my neighbor, whom I don't know personally. (reverse) fn 0v), my neighbor as the focus constatuent which identifies an mdavadual defined by tile 'wanner" property. 13ut an 01) there as no such slot-filler relataon' eacb lndlvadual is adentafied separately watfi a dascourse entaty. Thas data suggests that ldentaty sentences may not belong to sentence grammar but to discourse gram- mar On this level, a non-restractave relatave merged wath a DP renders the latter referentml, over-radmg the status otherwise assigned by sentence grammar. 138 Book Jevww / Lmgua 111 (2001) 131-155 (22) mae = [CLlo~ + bod + Pres. 3 sg.] Existential, possessive, and predicatlonal structures in Welsh require both mae and an independent locative element. Rouveret proposes that the locative mor- phemes, yn or gando, in structures (23)-(26) m Welsh (slmdarly for Irish and Scotch Gaelic) correspond to the Preposition which incorporates into the copula in Romance languages, deriving avolr'. (23) Mae Cl mawr yn yr ardd. Is dog big in the garden. (there is a big dog in the garden) (24) Mae dyn yn slarad efo Mair Is man in (Prog.) speak with Mair. (a man is speaking with Mair) (25) a. Mae Sion yn glaf Is Ston in sick. (Sion is sick) b. Mae'l" mor yn las Is sea in blue (the sea is blue) (26) Mae ganndo lyfr Is with him book (he has a book) Rouveret proposes the existence of two incorporation processes, one which adjoins the copula to a locative suffix, creating an existential verb hke mae, and another which incorporates an abstract prepositmn into a copula, deriving avoir. In the absence of the second process, the abstract preposition remains overt and the lan- guage lacks avou'. Bernard BORTOLUSSI, 'ESSE + Datif et ESSE + G6nitif en Latin" Bortolussi gives a negative answer, at least for Latin, to two questions raised in the introductory chapter: (i) Is 'possessive' DAT+ESSE an inversion of 'belong' ESSE + GEN? (1t) Does habere correspond to esse + P? Despite the apparent synonymy of (27) and (28), their free alternation in posses- sive contexts, and the [+ definite] and [+ammate] FFs of the possessor, the two structures are not equivalent. (27) Llber patri meo est Bookno m [fatherda t to-medat] is (My father has a book/mon pbre a un livre) Book review / Lingua 111 (2001) 131-155 139 (28) Hic liber patris mei est This bookno m [fathergen meigen] is (This book is my father's/le livre est a mon p6re) As Benveniste (1966) pointed out, the possessed object is dominantly indefinite in sentences like (27) but obligatorily definite in (28). Bertolussi analyzes (28) as a predication: owning a book is a property of the definite subject, while (27) is an existential sentence: the book is localized with respect to the animate DP. Latm had both existential and copula esse. Bertolussi argues that possessive (27) contains existential, not copula, esse. This important point has not been made before to my knowledge. a. Existential and possessive esse, unlike copula esse, requires an indefinite pos- sessed object. b. Both existential esse and possessive esse may appear at the head of the sen- tence, while copula esse is VP final. c. With both existential and possessive esse, the possessed element is construed as focus of the sentence, but the possessor is focus with copula esse, as shown by the wh-words (=focus) in the dative and the genitive constructions. (29) Quid signum Amphitrioni est? (Poss) What sign A.da t is? What sign is A's? (30) Cuius est id signum (Belong) Whosegen is this sign? d. Existential esse but not copula esse is systematically accompanied by time or space adverbials. Bortolussi proposes that the possessor in possessive constructions plays the same role as time and space adverbials in existential constructions, that of localizing the focalized nominal. 'Our hypothesis is thus that the possessive dative functions essen- tially as one of the spatio-temporal adverbials in an existential predication'.3 Bortolussi's demonstration that possessive esse is a subcase of existential esse undermines the incorporation hypothesis according to which possessive esse and habere both take the copula as their base. Lyons (1967) analyzed habere as an unaccusative verb like essere which assigns no Agent theta-role, but simply provides a way of placing the major participant of the possession relation in subject position. (Below Moro also analyzes habere as a copula verb.) Bortolussi points out, however, that habere was originally a full lexical verb meaning to 'hold' or 'take', which did not require an indefinite direct object. The Definiteness Effect showed up only as habere lost its lexical properties. (31) is thus ambiguous in Latin depending on the [+/- definite] construal of the direct object. 3 This suggestion was earher made m Lyons (1976, 1980), as Bertolussl points out. 140 Book re~ww / Lingua lll (2001) 131-155 (3 l) Hostis habet muros a. The enemy has walls. (possessive state) b. The enemy is holding (our/the) walls. (dynamic event) If habere denoting possession is the grammaticalized form of a lexlcal verb mean- ing to hold or take, then deriving habere from esse + P is redundant as well as his- torically unsupported. 4 Bortolussl concludes that the semantic equivalence of (1) and (2) IS a coincidence. The esse + dative structure is a subcase of locahsation structures while the esse + genitive structure IS a subcase of predication. The syntactic position of the subject determines its different semantics: the DAT DP subject of the localizing possessive predication is external to VP, while the GEN DP, as part of the predicate, is internal to VP. Caroline HEYCOCK 'Phrases reduites Inverses' In this perspicacious article, Caroline Heycock brings new evidence and new arguments to bear on the analysis of the inverse copula. Recall that for Moro. the canonical copula sentence (32) is derived by raising the subject of a sc to mamx sub- ject position while the inverse copula sentence (33) is derived by raising of the sc predicate. (32) That phrase of music might be one of the themes [That phrase of muslc]~ might be It, one of the themes] (33) One of the themes might be that phrase of musac. [One of the themes]j might be [,~ that phrase of music tl] Moro's hypothesis offered an account for the fact that extraction of or from the sc predicate is possible m a canonical S, but impossible in an inverse S. In the second case, the trace of the sc subject is not properly governed (34) (35) [Which of the themes]j do you think [that phrase of music, might be [t, t~] * Which phrase of music, do you think [one of the themesj might be [t, t~] Several researchers have assimilated the inverted copula to other structures derived by predicate fronting (36) a. Also a nice woman is our next guest. b. Remaining Issues are pay and transfers. Heycock shows that the claim is unfounded. For one thing, a plural NP commands singular agreement in the inverse copula construction but plural agreement in predi- cate fronting constructions. 4 This name point is made m Gueron (1984b) Book review / Lmgua 111 (2001) 131-155 141 (37) a. Unwed mothers and neighborhood delinquents are the cause of the problem. PREDICATION b. The cause of problem is unwed mothers and neighborhood delinquents. INV COPULA c. Also the cause of the problem are unwed mothers and neighborhood delin- quents. PREDICATE FRONTING Moroever, as Hoekstra and Mulder (1990) point out, seem and be constdered exclude predicate raising while allowing predicate fronting. (38) a. * The source of the problem is considered [John t]. b. Most embarrassing would have been considered [losing your keys t]. Note also that a raised predicate which is ungrammatical in the inverse copula is grammatical in a fronting structure. (39) a. * A hero is John. b. Also a hero is John. Rouveret (1996) accounts for the grammaticality of (39a) in Celtic and Semitic languages by arguing that the landing site of a raised predicate in these languages is Spec CP, not Spec IP. The grammatlcality of (39b) invites a similar account of pred- icate-fronting m English. It thus appears that while Welsh and Enghsh have A' movement of a predicate to Spec CP, English but not Welsh also has A-movement of a nominal predicate to Spec IP. It has been proposed that predicate raising crucially depends on the presence of BE to provide a landing site for the raised predicate (Moro,1991) or to create a con- figuration of equidistance allowing movement over the sc subject (den Dikken, 1993). Heycock offers empirical evidence that the verb BE is not crucial to the inverse copula. For while seem and be considered disallow the inverse copula, remain and become accept it. (40) a. b. (41) a. b. (42) a. b. I consider [John the culprit] * I consider [the culprit John] * The best solution seems instant retreat. * The real problem was considered John. The best solution remains instant retreat. At this point our real problem becomes John. Heycock attributes the contrast between (41) and (42) to distinct subcategoriza- tion properties of the matrix verb. Seem and consider select a simple DP sc with no F-nodes (43a), while remam and become select an ASP P (43b). 142 Book review / Lingua 111 (2001) 131-155 (43) a. (:eesmder } (43) b. VP V ASPP VP V DP DP DP E John our real problem I /bel remain become / ASP DP DP DP John our real problem Heycock refers to Gu6ron and Hoekstra (1988, 92) and Gu6ron (1994a) according to whom only a nominal which is T-marked (governed by T or an auxiliary verb) may be construed as a predicate. In (43b), Asp, which raises to V and T, T-marks the predicate nominal, leaving it free to raise to matrix subject posmon. In (43a), how- ever, the predicate cannot be T-marked unless its head, D, raises to V in LF But this movement is impossible if the predicate has raised to Spec IP in syntax. Heycock's new data in (42) and her proposal that aspect is crucial for the gram- matical analysis of the inverse copula seems to me to be a sohd result which must be incorporated in any lasting analysis of the construction. However, the assumption that a sc predicate raises to Spec IP qua predicate pre- dicts, counter to fact, the grammatlcality of (44b). (44) a. John is/remains/became a hero. b. * A hero 1s/remains/became John. In my own analysis, as Rouveret pointed out, no nominal which raises to Spec IP can be construed as a predicate in LF, in the absence of T-marking. We may also question the existence of small clauses hke (43a) of the Jespersen nexus or Stowell [NP XP] type, lacking F-projections. The subject and predicate of a sc agree in number and gender, overtly in French. ('Marie [fem.sg.] est ma meilleure amie [fem.sg.])' This agreement pattern is distinct from agreement m number and person mediated by Infl (Marie/Jean vient), and therefore cannot be attributed to longdistance agreement with T. How is agreement mediated in the sc m the absence of any F-node? Similarly, T m the matrix lnfl connects the proposmon to the time axis via its syntactic link to C How is the small clause predicate placed In time if no F-node links it to the matrix T? Book revtew/ Lmgua 111 (2001) 131-155 143 Finally, if we take categorial selection to be a reflection of the lexical content of a predicate, then a copula, lacking lexical content, cannot select any category at all. In the absence of any relation between V and DP, (43a) is not interpretable at the interface. An alternative hypothesis is possible which retains Heycock's proposal that aspect is essential to the inverse copula without positing bare scs or assigning selectional properties to verbs without lexical content. In this hypothesis, the raised nominal is not construed as a predicate in LF and the presence of BE, contrary to appearances, is crucial. We take remain, become and, optionally, be to be complex lexical items which spell out the result of the merger of two sets of FFs, each defining a head within a verbal shell. One F set is AGR. The other is an akt~onsart feature such as "inchoat- ive" or "durative" chosen from a small set of such Fs in the lexicon. At LF, a syn- tactically projected aktlonsart F is construed as an aspectual F within a T-chain. In (45) below, VP is dominated by an Akt/Asp projection, which links BE to Tense, and an AGR projection which mediates sc agreement. (We ignore matrix AGR). (45) TP Spec T' T AGRP Spec AGR' AGR AKT/ASP Spec AKT/ASP' AKT/ASP VP [+T] Spec W p V DP [T] our real problem [+AGRI (46a) and (46b) can both be derived from this structure. (46) a. John Is/became/remains our real problem. b. Our real problem is/becomes/remains John. 144 BooL lev¢c~ / Lm~,,tta 111 (2001) 131-155 Let us first derive the predicative copula sentence (46a) 1 assume the traditional view that copula BE corresponds to a minimal V identified by Tense and Agr FFs BE raises to the AKT/ASP head Here it may merge with an aspectual F [+F] (the F which d~stingufshes e,~tal from set In Spamsh and Portuguese), or else with [+dur] or I+mch], In which case the entire set of FFs is spelled out as remain or De~'ome If AKT/ASP is not proJected, then V functions as a copula: it raises to AGR and to T to check its FFs. which, under merger, identify the post-verbal nonnnal as a predicate situated at a point in tmle If Akt/Asp is projected, then be is [+ F1 or is spelled out as remain or 1)eeome In tins case. the verbal predicate has an aspectual value which, when linked to T and C within a T-chain. places the predicate m an interval of time rather than at a point in tnne. Let us now derive the lnvmse copula sentence (46b) Suppose that it is the sc predicate rather than the sc subject which rinses to Spec IP to check the EPP F of ~I In the absence of T-marking m LF, this nominal cannot be construed as a predlcale at the interface. However. if mt happens to contains a numeral such as one. or a scalar F. as in "the best'. "the only', etc., then the nominal can be construed as a quantifying expression or. more precisely perhaps, as a head- less relative construed as selecting an mdlvual froln a set of individuals defined by a property The small clause subject is construed as focus m VP-ftnal position, plausi- bly by de/ault In the absence of a T-marked predicate, BE may not function as a copula If Full Interpretanon is to be satisfied at the interface, BE must somehow acquire a non- copula construal m LF whmh allows it to link a quantlflcatlonal subject and a tocussed obJect. We suggested above that copula BE has punctual aspect by default BE + T link a state to a point In time But when BE has an aspectual F, I+FI, [+durl or [+inch], it must denote a state or process with temporal duration which can be linked to an interval of time. This requirement is satisfied in the canonical copula sentence by merger of t)('+F/l)e¢ome/remaln with a nominal predicate BE + pre&cate can denote a ,,late or change of state existing over time But how can aspectually extended BE denote a process or event m the inverse sentence m whJch ~t does not merge with a lexlcal predicate'? We believe this to be the key problem for any analysis of the reverse copula which invokes the role of aspect Our own answer is that while aspectually extended BE cannot denote a spatlo- temporal event such as wr~tm~ or being ~lat~ght) m the absence of merger with a lex- lcal predicate, it can denote a purely mental event. We propose that in inverse copula (47a) identity (47b) and specfflcanonal (47c), the aspectual content of be+F/be~ ome/t emam is satisfied b) a construal in which the x, erb denotes a process situated not m space-time but in time alone (47) a. My best friend is John. b Trotskv is Leon Bernsteln c What I want Js a good 5-cent cigar. Book review / Lingua 111 (2001) 131-155 145 The sentences of (47) imply a three-part reasoning processes. The first part, tar- geting the subject DP, picks out an entity defined by a numeral or a scalar property - my best friend, the nicest man m town, one good doctor - from a set of ent~t~es possessing the property, but w~thout identifying the entxty. The second part, target- ing the focus nominal, identifies an indiwdual but without making explicit the set from which the focus individual is extracted. The third part, targeting the verb, denotes a mental trajectory which connects the gap in the pre-verbal defimte descrip- tion with the focus filler in post-verbal posttlon. The pre-verbal nominal functions as the Source argument of a mental trajectory for which the post-verbal nominal is the Goal argument. A transitive event structure with durative aspect ~s thus composi- tionally attained. Our proposal preserves Heycock's insight concerning the importance of aspect in the inverse copula. But it also maintains our own hypothesis concerning the (nega- tive) role of T-marking in this structure, which is the opposite of Heycock's, and which alone accounts for the contrast between (44b) and, say, (33b). The proposal implies the existence not of two but of three construals of BE. Along- side the copula BE of predications, containing only T and AGR FFs, and statlve exis- tential BE, containing m addition a [+loc] akt F licensing locative, extstentml and pos- sessive construals, there also exists a dynamic aspectual BE, with an [+T] akt F m place of the [+loc] F, which defines a mental event. Unlike eventlve verbs hke take or hold, or their stative version have, which contain both [+loci and [+T] akt FFs, aspec- tual verbs like be+F remain or become have only a [+T] akt feature. Consequently, they define purely mental events, which occur in t~me but not in space, s In 'Notes sur gtre et avoir dans les langues indlennes', Annie Montaut brings her vast erudition in Indo-aryan languages to bear on two issues raised by Benveniste, the use of gtre for both possessive and perfect constructions, and the status of avo~r as an inverted gtre d. Hindi, an ergatlve language, lacks the verb avotr The verb gtre agrees with its object in all expressions of possession. If the object denotes a body part or a kin, the possessor DP takes DAT/GEN case. (48) [ra:m ki:/ke] [do bahneN ] thi:N Ram-GEN]DAT two sisters-fpl BE-imperf.f.pl (Ram has two sisters) Our analysis can also account for the grammatlcahty contrast between 0) and (n) (i) * I consider my best friend my dog (n) I consider my best friend to be my dog We claimed that e.g, remain m (46b) above is an aspectually lmperfectlve verb which denotes a state lasting in time In the canonical construal and a mental process m the inverse construal. Eplstemlc verbs, as m (l), are not compatible Wltfi lmpert~ctlvlty (ct. "Jbfin is remaining m Fans ~ vs '~ f am considering John intelligent') So the two nominals m (l) sfiows that the grammatlcahty of (n) is not directly a func- tion of the matrix verb However, although consider is itself punctual, we propose that it licenses an aspectual feature on to, plausibly via selection of an appropriate operator in the embedded Comp The merger of BE with the aspectual F of to enables the verb to denote a mental traJectory hnkmg its two arguments, thus attaining full interpretation 146 Bool revww / Lm#ua 111 (2001) 131-155 Otherwise, the possessor is a locative subject which differs for what we might call 'individual level' possession of an inherent quality (49) and 'stage-level' possession of a contingent object (50). (49) [un laRk6 meN] [hlmmat ] thl: these boys-mpl in courage-fsg, be-lmpf-fsg. (these boys had courage) (50) [ra:m ke pa:s] [bahut Mta.beN] halN Ram near many book-fpl, be-fpl. (Ram has many books) In Hlndl as in Latin, the expressmn of possession is syntactically distinct from that of 'belonging'. the latter contains no locanve element. (51) [ye kita:beN] [Ra'm kl:] haiN these books Ram-of are (these books are Ram's) The GEN/DAT case which identifies the possessor In (48) also marks the subject of the active pamclple in (52) (52) [Mohan Ra.kes M. hkhl.] kaha:m. [Mohan Rakesh DAT written] story (a story written by M.R.) Adopting Benveniste's analysis of the Classical Armenian perfect, Montaut char- actenzes the Hlndl perfect as an expression of possession in which the GEN/DAT external argument 'possesses the result of an action'. The active form corresponding to participial (52) is an ergative construction with ERG Agent and verb agreeing with its object (53) [Mohan Ra'kesh ne] [yah kaha:nl'] likhl: M.R.- ERG this story-fsg, wrlte-f.sg. (M.R wrote this story) Like the participle in (52), the verbal form in (53) shows number and gender agreement but lacks all verbal morphology such as tense, aspect, or voice. Montaut contrasts the nommal stative status of the active participle, which agrees only in number and gender with its object, with the processive verbal status of the passive participle, which takes the auxlhary verb go and an agentlve by-phrase. While both active participle and acnve erganve can take the exphclt stative marker hua, no passive form can She also stresses the fact that in an erganve language the subject is internal to the event domain m a true process clause, but external to the domain m both posseslve and erganve clauses Book revzew / Lingua 111 (2001) 131-155 147 The whole perfect system is m turn ra&cally distmct from the imperfective form, which contains progressive auxiliary BE, and in which a NOM-marked AGENT agrees with the auxiliary. Montaut proposes that the typical indo-aryan perfect w~thout 'avoir' in Hindi, Old bengali, or Marathi represents, w~th respect to the perfect w~th 'avoir' of the Romance languages, the same inversion as '&re a' w~th respect to 'avoir' in posses- sive structures ('ce livre est ~t moi' vs 'j'al un livre'). Possession-localization, perfect participles, and ergative structures may all be analysed as denying from the syntac- tic mversion of a predicative or processive structure vm externahsation of a subject which locahzes a result rather than mttiating a process. In 'L'oppositlon SER et ESTAR en portugais', Joao Costa reexamines the dis- tinctlon between copula vs aspectual ~tre. Portuguese has two distinct verbs ~tre, ser for individual level predicates (54a), and estar for stage-level predicates (54b). (54) a. A Maria 6 portuguesa. (Maria is Portuguese) b. O caf6 est~i pronto. (The coffee is ready) As Costa shows, the choice of ser or estar depends not on the lexical predicate alone, but on the entire predication. For example, the predicate 6cidos take ser ff the subject is llmOes (lemons), but estar if the subject is maqas (apples). (55) a. Os hm6es s~o ficidos ILP The lemons are acid. b. As maqas estao ficidas. SLP The apples are acid. Such contrasts support the hypothesis that a basic sc predication exists whose con- strual is independent of the verb dtre whose form it determines. (56) [vP [v" ser/estar [so NP ficldos]] Costa proposes that the difference between ser and estar (like that between seem and remain for Heycock) reduces to syntactic selection: ser selects a bare sc, while estar selects a TP. (57) a. ser [sc--] b. estar [vv T [sc__]] Costa adopts the hypothesis of Kratzer (1989) and Dlesing (1992) according to which temporary (stage-level) predications contain a spatio-temporal variable satu- rated by the T-node. Thus stage-level predications must project a T node, selected by estar, not a bare sc selected by ser. 148 Boo~ ;ev;eu /Lingua Ill (2001~ 131-155 As noted earlier, we take selection to be a grammatical manifestation of the lexi- cal-semantlc content of a predicate Verbs like ser and estar, which are devoid of any content other than the tense and agreement Fs which ~dentlfy a syntactic predi- cate. cannot participate in syntactic selection. If we associate a structure like (45), proposed above in order to account for reverse vs copula sentences, with all BE sentences, then both set and estar raise to Asp and T heads. While set has no aspectual F. which is equivalent to default punc- tual aspect, estar checks an aspectual F m Asp Consequently. an individual level predicate is construed as a property of the subject which does not exist m &scourse time but in the time interval defined by the subject itself, a long time period for lemons m (54a), the life-span of Maria in (53a) Because estar has an aspectual F. a stage-level pre&cate is linked to the time of enunciation rather than to the time defined by the subject. The Freeze - Kayne interpretation of Benvemste's "avoH est un ~t;'e ~) reverse'" leads us to expect the absence from natural language of 'avo;r+~'~" as an expression of possession. This complex expression would be derived by the redundant merger of an abstract preposition with the output of the incorporation of the same abstracl preposmon to BE. 'Avolr + P' does exist in languages hke French and English. but at expresses obligation, not possession ('J'al (des choses) a falre" - 1 have things to do, I have to do something). However. m 'Esserct et averct: les chtiques sujets el une analyse en "petite proposition" '. Andrea Moro reveals the existence in Italian of the unexpected pos- sessive expression. Moro had earher analysed existential sentences with there m Enghsh ol cl in Ital- ian as inverse copula sentences with raised [+loc] sc predicate (58) a. cl sono molti hbrl pro cl,+sono [,~ [DP moltl librl] t,] b. there are many books there~ +are [,~ [DP many books] t,] Moro proposes that c; + avere expresses possession m Itahan. Although c; ~s not obhgatorily overt m elevated style at is quasi obhgatory when the object is clit~c~sed and it is obligatory in many North Itahan &alects. e g Pavlan (60). (59) i ragazzl (cl) hanno moltl libri the boys CI-there have many books (58) I prufesur a *(gh') l~ han t, the professors cl-subj Cl-there them have (the professors have them) Ct+sono and ct+hanno are both derived by sc predicate raising. As for essere and avere, they are copula verbs inserted in minimally different syntactic structures. Ct+P corresponds to an unaccusative sentence containing a single AGR node, AGR T, which licenses a NOM DP Cl+ha corresponds to a structure with two AGR Book review / Lmgua 111 (2001) 131-155 149 nodes, T-AGR and V-AGR, which license both a NOM and an ACC DP. In the spirit of Hale and Keyser (1993), the interpretations of these structures owes nothing to lexical content and everything to structural configuration: existence is the simplest construal of a structure with an empty verb and a single AGR node, while possession is the simplest construal of a structure with empty verb and two AGR nodes. Moro's analysis of ct + ha in Italian does not extend to French and Spanish, how- ever, where the corresponding expressions y+a and hay denote existence, not pos- session. (63) a. I1 y a un livre sur la table. It there-cl has a book on the table. b. * Jean y a un llvre Jean there has a book. (64) a. Hay algunos libros sobre la mesa. There+haber some books on the table. b. * Maria hay unos libros sobre la mesa. Maria there+haber some books on the table. Itahan ct also differs from French and Spanish y In that it has an optional person F: the locative morpheme ci alternatively functions as I pers. plural clitic pronoun. (65) Non ci rispettano piu no us respect more (they don't respect us anymore) We could then say that possession is the simplest interpretation of a structure with an empty verb and two AGR nodes, provided the AGR T node has a [+pers] F to check a [+human] subject. This would just be a stipulation, equivalent to Freeze's analysis of P raising as depending on a [+human] complement of P in (9) above. We would hke to suggest, rather, that ct and y in Romance, construed as adverbial when linked to an empty XP, are never predicates but, hke si/se in the same lan- guages, function as a valence-changing morpheme when adjoined to v. The most common function of Romance SEts to saturate the external argument of a predicate on a low syntactic domain, plausibly vP, before the external argument role has been linked to a nominal. This derives an unaccusative predicate, so that e.g. Spamsh 'se alqmlan casas' takes on a passive construal (houses are for rent). Likewise, the merger of y to avolr m French or Spanish changes the valence of avoir from transitive ('la maison a un toit' the house has a roof) to unaccusative ('il y a un toit' - there is a roof). Italian ci is to French y what Italian si is to French se, that is, more than a valence changer. In 'impersonal structures', Italian si functions as or binds an argument of the verb. The si structure is transitive and exhibits no definiteness effect (DE). But in French 'impersonal structures', se is a valance changer, deriving an an unac- cusative structure with a DE. 6 6 Spamsh is midway between French and Irahan it has "impersonal" SE but tends to use SE rather as a valence changer 150 Book te~tew / Lmfua 11l (20011 131-155 (66) Si mangla le mele. (Someone is eating the apples) (67) a. * I1 se mange les pommes b. II se mange beaucoup de pommes lCl. Italian is also a pro-drop language while French is not. Plausibly, T has a strong person F in Italian which functions as (or brads a pro) subJect. If we assume that the strong person F of Italian T attracts the person F of ct and st to T while the person F in French T cannot, then we can account not only fol pro- drop but also tor the abdlty of Italian ct and st to externalize the external argument of V in T rather than absorbing ~t in We conclude that sdse and ct/y are particles of the same type, valance changers when adjoined to v. However In a language like Itahan with a strong person F in T they can also externalize rather than saturate an external argument. This unification of three differences betweeen Italian and French, pro-drop, tran- sitive vs unaccusatlve v/¢t +a/ha, and transitive vs unaccusatlve SE/SI + verb is not available if ct and y are construed as predicates rather than nominals capable of absorbing or externalizing an argument. In "A propos d'dtre et avotl en georglen', Lea Nash develops a detailed morpho- syntactic analysis of dt~e In Georgian. The discussion is so clear and the accompa- nying morphological paradigms are so complete that the reader gets a real feel of the language and can follow Nash's argumentation easdy. In the aorlst and future tense, Nash analyzes ~tre and avou as blmorphemlc verbs derived by prefixatlon of a reflexive or applicative morpheme to a meaningless root, K (m future) or Q (m aorlst). Under the BE construal, the aorist Q and the future K take a prefix t Like ~se In Romance, t has a reflexlve-benefactive medio-passive function with respect to the valence of the root verb. l + root derives an unaccusatlve verb etre with NOM sub- ject. Under the avotr construal, an applicative morpheme ale/O/Is prefixed to root K with [-animate] direct obJects and to Q with [+ animate] DO. The applicative prefix licenses a dative rather than a nominative subject (68) a. (69) a. Glvl ekiml 1- kn- eb- a Givi-NOM doctor-NOM SE BE-fut [-Trans] 3sg (Givl will be a doctor) b. v- 1- q'av-1 I-NOM SE BE-past (I was ...) m- a - kv - s I-DAT Appl RootK nb.-pres. (I have + [-anlm] DO) b. m-0 -q'av-s I-DAT Appl RootQ -pres (I have + [+anim] DO) In the present tense ~:tre is realized by the morpheme ar Book review/Lingua 111 (2001) 131-155 151 (70) v - ar I NOM.-BE (pres) (I am ...) Unlike the verbal roots K and Q, ar takes no reflexive or applicative morphemes at all. Nash points out that the absence of applicative morpheme on the copula in a language in which applicative morphology plays a major syntactic role weakens Freeze and Kayne's claim that the verb avoir derives from the copula + applicative morpheme/abstract P. Nash proposes that its inability to take reflexive or applicative morphemes indi- cates that ar is not a verb at all, but rather a person morpheme which spells out pre- sent tense. The inability to take applicative and reflexive morphemes is not sufficient evi- dence to refuse verbal status to ar, however. Auxiliary and copula verbs take no pre- fixal morphology in the general case. (71) unloved, disliked, ap-ply, over-look self-destruct, * unbeen, * dlshad, * ap-be, *in-have, *over-be, *self-have (72) a+niver, de+gager, sup-primer, inter-dire, se laver *aetre, *desavolr, *supetre, *s+avoir, etc. If we assume that prefixes operate on the lex~cal content of verbs, then the pres- ence of prefixes with K and Q and their absence with ar simply means that K and Q have and ar lacks lexical content. In all other respects, ar functions like any other copula: it is found in predicative sentence, inverse locatwes, and as an auxihary in the progressive form. Moreover, since the same roots K and Q are found in both expressions of exis- tence and expressions of possession in Georgian, I am surprised that Nash calls the result of applicative affixation to K/Q have rather than be. Bortolussi points out that the dative possessor is never found in Latin with habere. Nor does Italian ci+avere, French avolr or Enghsh have ever appear with a dative subject or with there. According to Mahajan (this volume), ergative languages like Hindi lack the verb have. If such is the case, there is an independent typological reason not to expect have in Georgian, an ergative language. Ar, K and Q are all claimed to be meaningless. But the fact that K and Q take mod- ifying prefixes, that K expresses future as be and takes a [-animate] DO as 'have' while Q expresses Past as be and takes a [+ animate] DO as "have" suggests that rather than lacking content, K and Q have a partially different content. Possibly the two verbal roots share a F-content whose construal varies with the prefix, such that i intemalizes a poten- tial argument while the applicative morpheme externalizes it. Distinct akt Fs, such as [+/- extended] may account for the difference in object selection: [-animate] objects, but not [+animate] objects are construed as measuring the action the verb denotes. We have just touched the surface of this rich article which brings us into intimate contact with a language with an elaborate and fascinating morpho-syntax. Nash's 152 Bool, p m te)~ / Lmvua 111 (2001) 131--155 discussion clearly supports the hypothesis of Marantz (1999), namely, that there is no difference between morphology and syntax. Leha Pmabm's 'Accord en Ddfimtude dans les phrases attributives du grand comonen" is another careful study of a language whose morphology is its syntax. Comormn, a Bantu language, has grammatical properties not shared by the other lan- guages discussed in this book, notably agreement m lexlcal class between the subject and the copula Other grammatical properties of Comorlan are famlhar fi'om studies of the Semitic family of languages: present tense predications ma),, sometimes must, lack the copula. The copula Is non-distract from a pronoun The verb has an lmper- fectlve form, m which an aspectual prefix (ng) selects a nomlnahzed verb. and a per- fectlve form, with no prefix and a suffix whose morphological shape depends on the verbal root. PIcabla shows that the morphological form of BE in Comorlan depends on dis- tractions m tense, stage-level (SLP) vs In&vldual level (ILP) predicates, and polar- ity. In the present tense, the verb BE reduces to one of two pronommal fomls, -pl or p2- x~)th an [LP but takes the progressive prefix ng, with a SLP. Pl is a cllttC AGR morpheme used with finite tense, which also functxons as an ACC or DAT argument chtlc, p2 is the chtm AGR morpheme for nominal sentences with a statlve pre&cate construed as generic, lterative or ILP. Both pronouns reqmre a defimte sublect In the past tense, an auxiliary verb is used m addltmn to agreemen! (Class includes number even number classes, such as 2 and 10, are plural ) (73) ze-mbwa ~° ZO 1() ntlti (pres-lLP) DEF-dogs AGR-p2 small (the-def dogs are small) ILP (74) ze-mbwa ~° zl > ka ntltl (past-ILP) DEF-dogs AGR-pl AUX small (lhe dogs were small) (75) ze-mbwa I° ngqzo > hunu (pres-SLP) DEF-dogs NG-AGR-p2 here (the dogs are here) (76) wo-wana-' ng - wa: dlsao Def-chlldren imp. pl move (the chddren are moving) Plcabia decomposes the pronommals pl and p2 into two (sets of) syntactic fea- tures, the Class Consonant (e g : in Class 10), which she proposes reahzes person and nb., and the vowel, which marks definiteness. Pl has a class-determined vowel which is +def and p2 has an invariable vowel o (except for Class 1) which neutral- 17e,, definltene,,s. Picabla proposes that PI also functions as head of the Ten.,,e pro- jectlon The fact that both pl and p2 require deflmte subJects suggests that the difference between the two pronominal forms of dtre may not concern definiteness The rich- ness of the data and the ignorance of the rewewer should &scourage speculation, but one wonders whether pl, whose vowel agrees with the sublect, may not be a true Book review/Lingua 111 (2001) 131-155 153 copula and p2, with invariable vowel, an aspectual verbal root, like estar, linked to tense via an intervening F-head. Ur Shlonsky undertakes an odyssey 'A la recherche du temps present: le paradoxe du Benoni en hebreu'. The paradox is that the same morpho-syntactic form functions in Hebrew both as (active or passive) participle and as a present tense verb, among other things. (77) Dani haya kotev sipurim D. BE-past write-Ben, stories (D. was writing stories) (78) Dam kotev sipurlm D. write-Ben stories (D is writing stories) Note that the participial Benoni is not to be compared with the perfective and imperfecnve verbal forms of Standard Arabic. Unlike the Arabxc aspectual forms, the Benoni shows agreement in number and gender but not in person. In Hebrew the verb BE (haya) can govern only the Benoni, but in Arabic the verb BE (kana) can govern the perfective and lmperfective forms as well. Shlonsky shows that the Benoni does not behave hke a verb with respect to tem- poral adverbials, position with respect to negation and in its inabihty to raise to C. Moreover, the Benonl is also used m semi-relative constructions (Sllonl, 1995) in which the head corresponds to the subject of the embedded phrase and the relative pronoun is identical to the definite determiner. (79) hine ?is ha-xosev 9al kesef. here's man the thinks-Ben.msg, on money (Here is the man who thinks about money) The semi-relative is to the free relative what a Benoni is to a fimte verb: its syn- tactic behavior betrays the absence of a tense node. The ability of the Benonl to function as a present tense in (76) is all the more mysterious. Shlonsky solves the mystery in a straightforward and interesting way: although Hebrew does not realize BE phonologically in the present tense, Shlonsky proposes that covert BE occupies the T node in present tense. (80a) should be represented as (80b). (8O) a. ?ani ~amen I (am) fat b. ?ani ~ ~amen I Be+pres+Isg fat T has morphosyntactic Fs which must be checked by a verb. But the Benonl, which lacks a tense F, cannot raise to T. The quandary is resolved by merging the Benoni with silent BE which raises to T. 154 Bool~ Jevtew / Lingua 1ll (2001) 131-155 One argument in favor of the zero BE morpheme in the present is that the present tense takes NEG, an F-Node which always requires a contiguous tense node. (81) Daniela lo tofer-et smalot D. NEG sew-Ben-fsg, dresses Moroever, while an embedded participial Benoni can never raise to Comp, creat- ing a subject-verb inversion configuration, a present tense Benoni can (82) a. %xgav Danlela tofer-et smalot now D. sew(Ben)-fsg, dresses b. ?axgav tofer-et Danlele smalot now sew(Ben) f.sg. D dresses In (82), the Benoni which has no T F to check in C merges with the auxiliary which does have one, and raises to C 'piggy-back'. Shlonsky proposes that a participle has a formal feature F which must be checked in Tense. An auxiliary must raise to Tense to check its T -feature. If an auxiliary is lexically present, the participle checks its FF within a T-chain (Gueron and Hoekstra, 1988). If the auxiliary is empty, the Benom provides It with lexlcal support. BE+benonl raise to T to check the F feature of the Benoni and the T F of BE. This F F is an av~ectual F, such as 'statlve" or 'dynamic', which projects an AspectP between AgrPrtP, the head of the participle, and VP. The participle raises to Asp to check ItS aspectual F and Aspect, which has a tense F, raises to Tense. Thus, while Hebrew has simple forms of past and future, the present tense is a complex structure with zero BE plus Benonx. This analysis of Hebrew recalls the standard analysis of English tenses, where the past tense (if not the future) is simple and the present tense is complex with event verbs. In both cases, a base form - par- tlciple or stem - raises to an aspectual head - zero or mg- which combines with a copula (full or silent BE) which Itself raises to Tense. This procedure allows the par- tlciple or stem to check its aspectual F and the copula to check its T feature. Conclusion This is a very rewarding book, as we hope our discussion shows. It contains both new data and new analysis of the grammar of BE. The articles invaryingly Inform the reader while provoking her or him to careful examination of each new hypothe- sis. Several important conclusions emerge. One is the implauslblhty of deriving HAVE from BE + P Another is the widespread construal over languages of BE as a pronominal. The discussion supports Postma's (1993) proposal that the construal of BE as a pronoun accounts for the absence over languages of 'Jean est 6t6', by Prin- ciple B of the Binding Theory. The level of discussion is uniformly very high. It is clear that an attentive editor read and commented on all the articles. Book revww / Lmgua 111 (2001) 131-155 155 It would have been good, however, if the authors had been able to organize a workshop or round table to discuss their articles. Mahajan, Montaut and Nash could have advanced the discussion of the relation between possessive dative structures, which are widespread over languages, and ergative langugage typology. Picabia and Shlonsky might have explored the similar copula systems of Bantu and Semitic lan- guages and compared the complex present tense in Comorian and Hebrew. Nash and Picabia could have advanced the discussion of copula BE as a pronominal, a person F, or a tense marker on the bas~s of the facts of Georgian and Comorian. In his presentation, Rouveret refers to Heycock and Kroch's (1996) arguments against the small clause hypothesis for inverse copula, identificational and specifica- tional BE. A dialogue between Moro and the Heycock of this book, both of whom rely crucially on the sc hypothesis, would have been welcome. A second point is that while the book is entitled 'l~tre and Avoir", and contains exhaustive far-reaching discussion of ~tre, there is virtually nothing on avoir Borto- lussl, Montaut, Nash, and Moro all argue that avotr does not derive from ~tre ~. This follows naturally if ~tre bears only tense and AGR morphemes while avoir is the vestigial form of a lexical verb with more content. Alongside Costa's discussion of ser and estar, a discussion of haber vs tener would have helped to fill out the pic- ture. These desiderata are perhaps utopic. Had the authors organized a round table, the publication of the book would have been considerably delayed. As for avotr, other books discuss its various uses. 7 An implicit dialogue will take place in any case between each reader and each author which can be extended through letters and email. As it is, the book is an extremely valuable study of BE. Rouveret's introduction alone is worth the price of the book and the effort of refreshing one's college French. And all the chapters are just as interesting as the first one. 7 See for example the articles by Harley and Gu6ron and Znbl-Hertz, eds. 