ELSEVIER Lmgua 111 (2001) 157-161 www elsevier nl/locate/hngua Book review Anthony Cowie (ed.), Phraseology: Theory, analysis and applications. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998, ISBN 0-19-829425-5 (Hardback), xiv + 258 pages. Reviewed by: Sarah Macann, Department of Linguistics, University of Canter- bury, Christchurch, New Zealand. ph: (64-3-)3642089, fax (64-3-)3642969, E- mail: slm64@ student.canterbury.ac.nz It is an idea almost umversally accepted that language production is not entirely free, but there is still dispute over the number and nature of word combinations which should be considered phrasal. Phraseology is the study of the nature (and dis- tribution) of words that are not completely free in combination, and there is increas- ingly strong evidence that phrasal items of various sorts account for the larger pro- portion of words in much of language production, and therefore constitute a significant proportion of a speaker's vocabulary. There seems little doubt that phraseologlcal research applies to constructions well beyond the obvious idioms and conversational formulae, extending to include the untaught collocatlonal restrictions that bedevil language learners. This volume, by providing an overview of current trends and research m phraseology, presents a wide-ranging picture of the present state of the discipline and outlines various aspects where further investigation might improve our understanding of the nature of phrasal Items. The nine articles in this volume adopt different perspectives for their examlna- t~ons of the nature and status of phrasal items, but two findings are repeated through- out - the general prevalence of phrasal items in language use and the recognition that many of these items may not have a completely fixed form. Even apparently trans- parent ~tems may be considered phrasal Insofar as their patterns of combination are constrained beyond simple selection restrictions; and there exists a flexlblhty in form which may be stylistic as well as transformationally motivated. However, despite the vast number of items that are less than fully free in combination - Igor Mel'6uk estimates that the phrasal lexicon may be as much as ten times larger than the lexicon for single-word ~tems (p. 24) - there might be only a few occurrences of any given item in even an extremely large data sample. As Anthony Cow~e observes, 'while the class of restricted collocation is strongly represented in many types of text, individual [items] are typically infrequent' (p. 16). This not only makes it diffi- cult to study the patterns of particular items or classes of items, but also to Investi- gate the size of the overall phrasal lexicon. 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science B V All rights reserved PII S0024-3841 (00)00023-1 158 Book review / Lingua 111 (2001) 157-161 In his introductory chapter, Cowle notes the increasing interest m the linguistic community m phraseology, as a field of both theoretical and applied research. Although phraseology started as a descriptive tradition, largely associated with lexi- cography and language-specific resources, more recent developments have been characterised by an increasing amount of precision and rigour. One significant task that Cowie takes upon himself is to provide a background for the subsequent contri- butions by clarifying sltmlarltles and differences in meaning for the vast number of terms encountered in the discipline. It is perhaps an lromc twist of fate that the study of phrases has itself spawned so many specialised phrases, and Cowle illustrates cases where the same term is used with distinct meanings, and attempts to match the different terms being used to designate the same or overlapping concepts. Increas- ingly fine distractions are being drawn amongst types of phrasal units and while there seems to be general agreement on definitions at the broadest level, there is still debate on the exact criteria for some categories (for example, whether a distinction should be drawn between cases where a two collocators exclusively trigger each other's bound sense, as in grind one's teeth, and cases where this sense is associated with a small set of words - for example, meet maght command the set demand, need, l equtrement, or request). The contributions are arranged into four topic areas dealing with theoretical approaches to analysing phrasal items, corpus analysis of item distribution, investi- gation into the stylistic effects of different patterns of use and an account of the sym- biotic relationship between phraseology and lexicography. The first section is dedi- cated to elaborating theoretical approaches to the description and documentation of phrasal items and the relationships between bases and thear collocators. In Chapter 2, Igor Mel'~uk outlines has theory of lexacal functions, which abstracts individual items to a keyword-operator arrangement. Th~s kind of analysis has the dual advantages of enabling consistent differentmtion between the colloca- tors associated with a particular base, while also making at clear that adentical seman- tic relations hold between a wide variety of keywords and thear respectave colloca- tors. Mel'~uk's system also states the syntactic context for each collocataon, and the ability to combine operators allows the insertion frame and meaning of individual collocations to be systematically described with only a relatively small number of operators. The practical applications for this approach are pamcularly obvious for collocation dictionaries, a point which is subsequently taken up by Thlerry Fontanelle (Chapter 9). In Chapter 3, Veronika Teliya, Natalya Braglna, Elena Oparina and Irma San- domirskaya advocate an anthropological approach to analysing phrasemes and call for a more ideographic manner of documenting phraseological units, m lexicons arranged around semantic fields. They stress the centrality of culture to a full under- standing of a language: language is a reflection of the cultural values of its hngms- tic community, and this is particularly the case for lexical items which are not fully transparent. The authors contend that the phraseology of a language cannot be fully described without reference to and understanding of the cultural context in which at developed, echoing the ideas of Sapir and Whorf and suggesting that 'cultural cate- gories' such as value-judgements of canonical 'good versus evil" are ingrained into Book revtew/ Lmgua 111 (2001) 157-161 159 individuals' subconscious, manifesting in language as well as stereotypes and rituals. This goes beyond the existence of lexical items denotmg real-world objects peculiar to the culture (such as traditional household items) or encoding 'cultural concepts' such as the ethical implications of truth in Russian, which are absent in English. They observe that the collocations for semantically related keywords can be grouped according to repeated metaphorical relations, and follow Lakoff and Johnson (1980) in recognising the existence of 'kernel metaphors', which drive collocations along a recurrent theme. This is illustrated in the pattern for the keyword life, which attracts collocators according to the metaphors 'life as a path' or 'life as economic value'. In the next section, Rosamund Moon and Bengt Altenberg consider ways to eval- uate the extent and patterns of use of phrasal items through analysis of corpora, focussing on the written and spoken media respectively. Moon divides a list of 6,700 'phrasal lexemes' into three major categories: metaphorical expressions (such as bite the bullet, rock the boat), formulae (you know, as white as a sheet), and 'anomalous collocations' (including grammatically ill-formed items such as by and large, as well as 'defective collocations' where the meaning of an item is unique to the collocation, as for beg in beg the question). She analyses the frequency and distribution of these items in the eighteen million-word Hector Corpus and her chief finding repeats the point already made of the low level of occurrence for any given item, despite the overall prevalence of the phrasal class. This is highhghted by the zero frequency of well-instantiated items such as kick the bucket and out of practice. Indeed, 65% of all items investigated occurred with a frequency of less than one per million corpus words, and occurrence of proverbs, similes or sayings was 'almost entirely a matter of chance' (p. 87). Nevertheless, there are some clear patterns of distribution, such the considerably greater use of functional constructions (of course and at least), in comparison with more colourful idioms and metaphors (bite the bullet, one man's meat is another man's poison). The most common phrasal lexemes were colloca- tions, especially those combinations where the interpretation of one word was depen- dent on the other words in the expression (beg the question or in ttme). Cautioning that her own data were relatively limited, Moon advocates investiga- tion of larger corpora, suggesting this might also shed further light on transforma- tional properties of little-occurring items such as idioms, and other corpora may indi- cate varying patterns of use in different registers and genre. Moon also gives a valuable account of the difficulties in corpus analysis of phrasal items, such as the availability of suitably large corpora and the flexibility required to accommodate the degree of variation that may still occur within colloca- tions and phrases which are not absolutely fixed (for example, transformational alter- natives, or choice within a narrow range of near-synonymous options - to tear to pieces~shreds). In contrast to Moon's approach of examining the patterns of predetermined items, Altenberg examines the distribution of all strings of three words or more occurring at least 10 times in the London-Lund Corpus of Spoken English (nearly 500,000 words). Analysing the functions of these strings, Altenberg reports that the majority are speech-specific and tend to be compositional and grammatically well-formed. 160 Bool lel'te~ /Lingua 111 (2001) 157-161 However, they serve predominantly discourse functions, acting as conventlonahsed clause-openings (signalling contrast, clarification or interrogation) or conveying speaker attitude or response (thanks, assurance or disagreement), rather than encod- ing core propositional content. Altenberg suggests that these sequences provide speakers with a choice of preconstructed umts for rapid production m discourse at a minimum of processing cost (cf Pawley and Syder, 1983) Phraseological phenom- ena m spoken language are related to pragmanc pressure to clearly indicate discourse intent and-attftud-e, Wthlfe inalntamlng a role m conversation, convennonaiizanon occurs when this pressure leads to the development of routine expressions for recur- rent situations Use of these combinations is a convenience for speakers, who need to retrieve expressions quickly while maintaining tfielr discourse rofe and their 'phrasal' character is due less to opacity of meaning than the snnple statistical fact of their occurrence as a unit in a given situation. The third part of the book addresses the stylistic lmphcatlons of phrasal items, including genre analysis and consideration of the difficulties faces by non-native users. In Chapter 6, Rosemarle Glaser Investigates the strategies employed by profi- cient language users to maintain reader interest by manipulating the forms ot idioms, the "dominant' type of phrasal item. Given the highly conventlonahsed form usually associated with idioms, the acceptable bound for any dxstomon should be very low, and it IS an issue of considerable interest exactly how far they can be changed while still remaining recognlsable to the audience Glaser's method was to consider how stylistic effect would be altered by para- phrasing the phraseologncal unit, substituting a more or less synonymous simple lex- eme, or deleting the item altogether. From her examination of material from a vari- ety of sources, Glaser is able to conclude that distribution of phraseological units varies highly between text types and genres, according to not only the author's pref- erences but also the requirements of the situation Phrasal items carry connotanons which may be emotive (expressing humour or user attitude, including derogation or taboo), or neutral but associated with a particular register (such as technical terms). so use of items connoting informality can make a popular science amcle appear more accessible to the reader Similar strategies are encountered in textbooks, pre- sumably with a view to making the reader feel more involved or less daunted by the content and to 'enhance intelligibility and memorability" (p. 136). As might be expected, commercial advertising is particularly rich in examples of famihar phrases being distorted to bring m favourable implications and such manipulation goes well beyond the normal range of flexibility. Phrasal choices are also an important con- tributor to literary style and Glaser demonstrates the intricacies that can be associ- ated with a text and the care that must be taken in order that these be preserved and nothing be lost m the translation In Chapters 7 and 8, Sylvnane Granger and Peter Howarth report on dlfl'erences m the ways In which native and non-native speakers use phraseologlcal items m acad- emic writing, According to Howarth, up to 46% of verb-direct oblect constructions m native speaker writing may be restricted, as the academic situation calls t\)r use of conventlonalised forms to allow ideas to be conveyed 'with the mmnnum of atten- tion drawn to any individual style of the writer" (p. 177) This leaves readers free to Book revtew/ Lingua 111 (2001) 157-161 161 concentrate on content and an inadequate grasp of the style may mean more attention is paid to the writing style than the ideas, leaving writers unable to communicate effectively. Both investigations report considerable differences, with non-native users making less use of phrasal items overall, and in different patterns. To give just one example of the differences observed by Granger, non-native users show significantly lower overall usage of amplifying adverbs but make proportionately greater use of widely applicable items such as completely and totally than restricted forms such as bitterly cold or hideously ugly. This overgeneralization could be either through ignorance of the more specific option or through fear of error. In turn, cross-linguistic interference may be implicated in such use as is made of the more restricted combinations, with learners commonly using a specific amplifier in English where it closely resembles that used in their native language. Meanwhile, non-natives make less use of delexi- cal ('light') verbs in collocations, which Howarth attributes to uncertainty over the patterns of acceptable use. Granger proposes that the low level of non-native use of such 'prefabricated units' suggests that learners have a reduced awareness of combinatorial restrictions. Learn- ers appear to overapply general language rules, assuming composltionality, so explicit instruction is required to make them aware of phraseological conventions in the second-language situation. However, Granger also cautions against overempha- sis on phraseological instruction as it cannot be assumed that repeated exposure will be enough to ensure learners develop generative ability. Given the undoubted influ- ence of linguistic transfer between first and second languages, it is also likely that language learning resources can only be effective if targeted at learners of a specific language background and with full account taken of the first language influence. Howarth echoes Granger's conclusion that learners must be explicitly taught the conventions of those restricted collocations falling between completely fixed expres- sions and fully free combinations (although this may more properly fall within the domain of highly-speciahsed teaching of English for academic purposes, rather than more general EFL instruction). Howarth adds that there is no clear evidence of a direct correlation between overall language proficiency and accurate use of colloca- tions, and proficient learners may even make more errors, particularly in the form of 'blends' (the illegal combination of parts of two distinct collocations). Howarth con- tends that this should be taken as demonstrating a high degree of awareness of phrasal forms, however, as both targets must be thoroughly familiar to be combined. The final section of the book explores the relationship between phraseology and lexicography. In Chapter 9, Thierry Fontanelle describes the utility of bilingual dic- tionaries as a resource for deriving information on collocational restrictions. This is demonstrated by applying a system adapted from Igor Mel'~uk's lexical function analysis as a tool in arranging the collocations extracted from the machine-readable version of the French-English bilingual Collins-Robert Dictionary. By their very nature, bilingual resources make explicit the restrictions on collocational construc- tions, but many fail to describe the scope of meaning of the different collocates asso- ciated with a base. Combining dictionary content with this sort of formal description has the potential to remedy this deficit. With the abstracted analysis, the user is able 162 Bool~ levwu /Lingua 111 (200l) 157-161 to determine the correct collocation for her purpose, via the semantic specification (for example, based on the keyword enthusiasm, the appropriate collocator may be ebb or slacken if the emotion wanes independently, or quench or ~hmlp If the key- word is the object in a causative construction) This format also allows information to be retrieved from a number of starting points - the base, or a collocate, or even the semantic operators, and allows the base to be viewed as the centre of a network of semantically explicit collocates. Finally, continuing the vein of his lntroduchon, Anthony Cowie traces the recent history of phraseology, documenting the recent increase in number, size and com- plexity of lexlcographlcal resources in the field (parttcularly specific collocational dictionaries) Cowie describes the earliest Western efforts at speclahsed phrasal dic- tionaries in the 1930s and the established Russmn tradmon which in the 1940s devised classification systems for different types of phrasal combinations The early focus on completely fixed forms ~s now giving way to interest in combinations with some degree of freedom, but Cowle notes that resources still concentrate more on the syntactic functions of collocators, to the exclusion of semantic information - a situ- ation which may be remedied if systems such as Mel'6uk's lexical functions gain greater currency Nevertheless, the increasing depth of information and detail in recent works make it obvloub that the study of phraseology has grown in precision just as its scope is becoming Increasingly broad The range of topics covered in this book reflects the fact that phraseology is still very much an emerging field, finding its place in the grey area between generative grammar and lexlcal retrieval. As the various articles repeatedly show, phraseology IS not so much concerned with the distinction between absolutely set phrases and completely free combinations, as the less clear-cut cases of items along a continuum from "more or less conventional ... [to] .. more or less free" (p. 12). The authors succeed in their aim of outhnlng current issues In phraseology and identifying hkely future directions, and while this cannot offer definitive answers on the exact nature of the phrasal lexicon or completely explain patterns of use, the approach enables a wider range of topics to be covered with a greater depth of reformation on the rele- vant research than would otherwise have been possible. This kind of documentation of the current state of the discipline provides a sound platfornl for further research and should help spur progress m phraseologlcal study. References Lakoff, G and M Johnson, 1980 Metaphors we live by Chicago Umverstty ot Chicago Press Pawley, A and F H Syder, 1983 Two puzzles lot hngmstlc theoly nauvehke selection and natlvehke flne.m~,z I~_ [C Rmhards,. I~_W SchmJ~_ (e_~L,.)~. l~mgna~,j~ and_Commnmc~m~m~_ 1~1~222.~_ l_smdon_ Longman 