ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 449-465 www.elsevier.nlilocate/lingua Book review J. Elsness, The perfect and the preterite in contemporary and earlier English. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1997. 432 pp. L.A. Michaelis, Aspectual grammar and past-time reference. London: Routledge, 1998. 296 pp.* Reviewed by Ilse Depraetere, English Department, Catholic University of Brus- sels, Vrijheidslaan 17, 1081 Brussels, Belgium. 1. Introduction The books by Michaelis and Elsness both deal with the perfect, although the two authors take different approaches to the subject and have different aims: while one of Elsness™ basic concerns is to offer a quantitative analysis of the use of the perfect from Old English to Modem English, Michaelis aims to redefine the category of aspect and apply the model outlined to the perfect. However, the books share enough common ground to allow for a comparison of the authors™ views on particular issues. I will first give an outline of each of the books; in the second part I will offer a crit- ical analysis of Michaelis™ and Elsness™ approaches to issues which are common to both works. 2. Elsness (1997) Elsness™ starting-point is the observation that the often-heard claim that the pre- sent perfect is on the increase is based on intuition rather than on solid evidence. He wants to remedy that shortcoming by actually comparing the use of the present per- fect in the different stages in the development of the English language. For contem- porary English, he uses the Lancaster/Oslo/Bergen (LOB) corpus and the Brown cor- pus. As certain categories of written texts and spoken English do not feature in these corpora, Elsness compiled another corpus of contemporary British and American English (CONTCORP) to make sure that no changes go unnoticed because of inad- * I am very grateful to Susan Reed for her detailed comments on a draft of this text. 0024.3841/99/$ - see front matter 0 1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-384 1(99)00046-7 450 Book review I Lingua I10 (2000) 449-465 equate corpus material. To investigate the earlier stages of English, he brought together a corpus covering Old English, Early Middle English (1200) and the peri- ods 135&1400, 1550-1600 and 1750-1800. Chapter 2 offers a discussion of the traditional tricky perfect/preterite matters. It deals amongst others with the question whether the perfect is an aspect rather than a tense (pp. 14-20, pp. 50-54). Elsness also offers a survey of the different adverbials that typically combine with the perfect and/or the preterite (pp. 20-27).™ The defi- nite-past theory (pp. 27-3 l), including a discussion of sentences of the type Did yowl seelHave you seen the Monet exhibition? (pp. 31-44) the tense-logical approach to the perfect/preterite (pp. 54-66) and the relationship of the verb forms with the given/new distinction (pp. 45549) also get attention. This chapter discusses the cur- rent relevance approach to the perfect (pp. 67-74) and Elsness also touches upon the number of perfect types that may be distinguished (pp. 74-76). All in all, this chap- ter offers a solid, down-to-earth discussion of issues relevant to the perfect. It is not particularly groundbreaking, but it offers some fine observations and is remarkably clear. It is also useful in view of the fact that in the chapters to come the author checks whether the views traditionally held survive the confrontation with corpus data. The author sums up the semantics of the present perfect and the preterite as fol- lows: ﬁthe preterite is typically selected in cases where the verbal situation is located wholly in the past and there is a past-time anchor with which the situation is associ- ated, while the present perfect is used of unanchored past situations and of situations which extend from the past up to the deictic zero-point or are not clearly separated from that pointﬂ (p. 27). Chapter three first (pp. 79-95) offers a frequency analysis of the Brown corpus of written American English and the LOB corpus of written British English, each of which consists of slightly more than 1 ,OOO,OOO words. The corpora confirm the view that in written AE, the preterite is more often used than in written BE, whereas in written BE the present perfect has a higher frequency (pp. 83-84). The LOB/BUC sections are followed by a detailed contextual analysis of the CONTCORP. Because of the counting problems Elsness faced when analysing the LOB and BUC corpora and because of the absence of spoken English in those data bases, he decided to compile another corpus (measured in number of constructions, i.e. (non-)finite (present/past) ((non-)progressive) perfect and preterite forms, rather than in number of words, as in the case of LOB and BUC).* Apart from spoken (only) British English (to a large extent SEU material), CONTCORP comprises a corpus of ™ Michaelis (1998: 164-172) also offers a survey of the constraints on adverbial co-occurrence associ- ated with the resultative perfect, the continuative perfect and the existential perfect. Her approach is more geared at explaining why there are restrictions on the adverbial combinatory potential. Michaelis points out that for- adverbials and definite punctual past-time adverbs do not combine with an experien- tial perfect. In doing so, she overlooks the possibility of echo-statements: I HAVE got up at nine. I HAVE worked in the garden for three hours, which, strangely enough, are discussed on pp. I15 and 238. Elsness does not mention these possibilities. ? A major problem with both the LOB and the BUC corpora is that infinitive perfect constructions and present perfect constructions except those in the third person singular carry the same tag, which makes it almost impossible to extract the tensed occurrences of the present perfect. Book review I Lingua I10 (2000) 449-46.5 451 British (1883 cons~ctions) and American (1588 const~ctions) English, part of which is taken from the LOB corpus. CONTCORP differs from the LOB/BUC cor- pus in that it includes other text genres (i.e. drama) and spoken British English. Again, the data seem to confirm the hypothesis about the difference in overall fre- quency of use of the preterite and the present perfect in BE and AE. As in the case of the LOB/BUC corpus, Elsness again offers a detailed analysis (pp. 106-l 11, pp. 1.53-165) of the distribution of the different verb forms in the different text categories (scientific texts, news magazines, newspapers, novels, drama, letters, radio news, telephone conversations, face-to-face conversation).3 Whenever possible, he uses sta- tistics to check whether the differences observed are significant. The next issue exam- ined is the combination of different types of adverbials with the present perfect, the preterite, the pluperfect and the past progressive {pp. 111-139). The corpus examples that relate to the question of the temporal anchoring of the preterite are discussed in 3.3.10 (pp. 139-153). In 3.3.12, Elsness investigates the distribution of the present perfect, the preterite and the pluperfect according to clause type (main clause, object that-clauses, relative clauses, when-clauses). The discussion of the use of verb forms is not situated in a particular theoretical framework about the use of tense in sub- clauses. Elsness works the other way round: he checks what are the tenses used in the main clauses in which, for instance, the r&-clauses are embedded and then tries to explain why, for instance, the tendency for the verb form to be the same as that in the main clause is less considerable than that for a main clause verb to be the same as the preceding main clause. For this part of the investigation. one may wonder what the quantitive analysis is likely to reveal: what possible conclusions can one draw, for instance, from the obse~ation that there are fewer preterite t&-clauses embedded in preterite main clauses than there are preterite non-restrictive relative clauses embed- ded in preterite main clauses? The final section of the contextual analysis is focused on some clause-level parameters: aspectual character (pp. 190-194) (cf. infra), clause structure (i.e. what is the preferred verb form in SV, SVO, SVC sentences?, pp. 19%197), realisation type of subject (i.e. what is the distribution of the preterite/present perfect with I, you, he-she-it, other pronoun, noun-headed NP?, pp. 197-201), negation (i.e. what about the relative frequencies of the preterite/present perfect in positive, negative and near-negative sentences?, pp. 201-204), interroga- tion (i.e. is there a different distribution of the present perfect/preterite in declarative and interrogative sentences, pp. 204-208): voice (i.e. does voice affect the distribu- tion of verb forms?, pp. 208-215). For each of the issues discussed, Elsness tries to offer an explanation for the distribution of the verb forms. To make up for the absence of spoken American English and to supplement the corpus findings, Elsness set up an elicitation test in which native speakers of BE and AE were asked to rate the acceptability of present perfect/preterite sentences with, for instance, particular types of adverbials, on a ranking scale. This is a particularly interesting complementation to the textual analysis that corroborates some of the findings from the previous part. .™ On pp. 153-165, more refined subdivisions are made by the author. 452 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 449465 The over-all conclusion to chapter 2 is definitely that there are marked differences in the distribution of the perfect and the preterite in AE and BE, although the basic functional distribution is the same. The differences are especially conspicuous when adverbials like just, recently, always, never, ever, already and yet are used in the sentence (cf. pp. 231-232). In sentences without an explicit past time anchor in which the situation is located completely before the moment of speaking, the preterite is used in both AE and BE (e.g. ABSTRACT Experiments were made on an electric arc applying a porous graphite anode tolled by a transpiring gas (Argon). Thus, the energy transferred from the arc to the anode was partly fed back into the arc, BUC, JO2 3/5, p. 152), but there is more reticence in AE towards the use of a present perfect in such contexts. The author qualifies the latter class as comprising most cases ﬁwhere the distinction between the two verb forms is blurred and where either is acceptableﬂ (p. 361). In the third chapter, Elsness looks at the development of the perfect. To that end, he compiled his own corpus of historical data (cf. supra), the database for each period consisting of about 1,000 preterite/(present/past) perfect forms.4 He starts with a clear survey of existing research on the history of the perfect form (pp. 237-253) and explains how he went about in interpreting the HAVE/BE + participle constructions (as a perfect or as an adjectival form), also pointing out difficulties inherent in research with older texts (pp. 254263). In the ensuing contextual analy- sis of the HISTCORP (pp. 263-339), he examines the same parameters as he did in the CONTCORP (although in less detail), which makes for an interesting survey of possible shifts in influencing factors throughout the development of the English lan- guage. The historical corpus enables Elsness both to challenge and corroborate some of the existing views on the development of the perfect. It reveals that the ‚heyday™ of the perfect was the 1750-1800 period; the form is on the decline in AE and a sim- ilar process is taking place in BE.5 According to Elsness, two factors play a decisive role in this development: (1) in spoken English, the auxiliary have is used in a reduced form and is sometimes hardly audible; (2) in the majority of cases, there is no morphological difference between the past participle and the preterite. This book is an impressive piece of work. The author displays the reticence required when embarking upon corpus research of this kind: he takes great care to justify every step he takes and to put his interpretations into perspective. Although I have some reservations about the relevance of the inclusion of a few of the quantita- tive surveys, it definitely offers a wealth of data and concrete evidence for the dis- tribution of the preterite/present perfect in BE and AE and the development the pre- sent perfect in the history of British English. It therefore provides a very useful contribution to the study of the perfect. 4 For the period 1750-l 800, Elsness also compiled a corpus of AE. s Michaelis voices the same opinion, but her conclusion is not based on corpus evidence. She argues (p, 112) that the preterite and the present perfect are partially overlapping categories. Neutralisation occurs in the resultative context, in which environment the preterite is preferred in AE. ﬁIf we can speak in terms of broad diachronic trends, the past in American English appears to be expanding its semantic range at the expense of the PrPﬂ (pp. 112-l 13). Book ret*iaw i Lingua I IO (20001449465 4.53 3. Michaelis (1998) Michaelis™ aim is to determine ﬁthe precise nature of aspectual meaningﬂ, to investigate the ﬁgrammatical embodiment of aspectual meaningﬂ and to show how tense and aspect interact (p. 3). The perfect serves as the test case. It follows from Michaelis™ aim that her approach, unlike Elsness™, is far more theory-driven than data-driven. In the first chapter and part of the second chapter, Michaelis offers a semantic and function~ly based model of aspect which, in her opinion, represents a part of the conceptual system of speakers. She distinguishes three types of aspect: situation aspect, viewpoint aspect (or grammatical aspect, i.e. the perfective/imperfective dis- tinction), and phasal aspect. Situation aspect corresponds with Aktionsart or ‚aspec- tual character™, which is the term Elsness prefers (cf. infra). The two classes to be distinguished within the ‚ontology of idealized situations™ (p. 58) are states and events. Events are characterized by the fact that they ﬁhave salient boundariesﬂ and ﬁinvolve change over timeﬂ (p. 4); states have the properties of distributivity and cumulativity (p. 17). Viewpoint aspect also comprises two classes, also called states and events, but here the decisive criterion is the ‚expression of attention to end- points™ (p. 58). Viewpoint aspect ﬁentails the speaker™s perspective upon a situationﬂ (p. 7). Finally, there is phasal aspect. This is a class of aspectual operators that either ‚map™ (p. 4) an event (e.g. He read the hook) onto a state (e.g. HP was readies the book or He has read a the book) or a state (e.g. Harry felt ill - Harry was elated) onto an event (e.g. Harry stopped feeling ill - Ben told Harry the news. He was elated). Concretely, the progressive, the perfect, terminative and inceptive construc- tions are the aspectual operators that make up the phasal aspect class. The progres- sive and the perfect are called stativising operators, the inceptive and the terminative const~ctions are perfe~tivising operators. It is clear from this brief outline that in Michaelis™ approach, ﬁaspectual characterization is flexibleﬂ (p. 5). In chapter 2 and 3, Michaelis offers an outline of Construction Grammar, which is the framework within which she prefers to analyse the three perfect forms (i.e. the past perfect, the present perfect and the past perfect) (chapter 4) and the three mean- ings/senses of the perfect (i.e. the resuhative perfect, the existential perfect, and the continuative perfect) (chapter 5). In a Construction Grammar approach, the English perfect system is a systematic network of interconnected information structures, i.e. pairings of meaning and fonnh There is an abstract perfect construction that is con- nected with three temporally inflected perfect constructions (present perfect, past perfect, future perfect) through so-called inheritance links. Some specifications asso- ciated with a particular constmction may be cancelled or augmented by const~ction- specific constraints, i.e. constraints associated with the dominated construction. The semantic value of the ‚general perfect™ is that it consists of an anteriority relation whose reference point is temporally underspecified. Another common element of meaning is that all perfect types refer to a state of aftermath following the occurrence of some event. h It is difficult to do justice to the framework within the space constraints of a review article. 4.54 Book review I Lingua 110 fZ?OU) 449-465 Although the books differ in scope and aim, they obviously touch upon common ground and it is interesting to consider the points of divergence between the two authors: Michaelis disagrees with Elsness in her conviction that the perfect is an aspect and unlike Elsness, Michaelis believes that the three types of perfect are dif- ferent semantic categories rather than three uses of the perfect. Both reject a compo- sitional approach to the perfect, but they draw different conclusions from that obser- vation. These issues will be analysed in more detail in sections 4.1, 4.2. and 4.3. Moreover, I believe that both authors™ approaches may benefit from an inclusion of the category of (un)boundedness as it is defined in Declerck (1991) and Depraetere (1995), and I will try to show why in section 4.4. 4. Elsness and Michaeiis compared 4.1. Is the perfect an aspect? Elsness points out that the decision whether or not to consider the perfect as an aspect very much depends on how one defines aspect. Anderson (1973). for instance, claims that aspect has to do with relating a situation to a reference point; it may be related before, after or at a point in time. From that point of view, the per- fect is obviously an aspect. However, Elsness stresses that this is not the mainstream definition of aspect. He tends to agree with Lyons, who argues that in universal grammar, the dividing line between tense and aspect is not always so clear, as ante- riority (tense} usually goes hand in hand with completion (aspect). Even Comrie (1976), who opts for an aspect analysis, adds that ﬁit is an aspect in a rather differ- ent sense from the other aspects treated so farﬂ (1976: 52). Elsness does not take a decision at this stage; he finishes this section by saying that ﬁit should be borne in mind that Lyons™ description is closer to the mainstream of contemporary thinking - and writing - about aspectﬂ (p. 18).7 Later in the text, i.e. when discussing the com- positional approach to the perfect (cf. section 4.2), it becomes clear that Elsness believes the present perfect is a tense. He does take a clear stand when it comes to the in his view fallacious relation that is sometimes claimed to exist between ‚perfective aspect™ and ‚perfect™: there is no ﬁimmediate connection between the present perfect in present-day English and the fundamental aspectual concept of perfectivityﬂ (p. 18). He uses the latter concept as a synonym of ‚non-progressive form™, imperfectiveness referring to progressive forms. Michaelis uses the terms differently: she points out that the perfective-imper- fective distinction is not marked in the verbal morphosyntax in English (p. 19); they ™ Elsness (1997: 17) gives the following quote to explain Lyons™ view: ﬁit is often difficult to draw a distinction between secondary tense and aspect. Anteriority is not always distinguishable from comple- tion or termination; and it is for this reason that linguists are still undecided as to whether the so-called perfect and pluperfect in English . . are to be distinguished from corresponding non-perfect forms in terms of tense or in terms of aspect ﬂ It must be recognized that at this point there is not, and cannot be, in universal grammar any sharp distinction between tense and aspectﬂ (Lyons, 1977: 689-690). are covert categories and synonyms of the event (perfective) - state (imperfective) viewpoint aspect distinction. The title of Michaelis™ book is already a hint that she does not take the same line as Elsness as far as the categorisation of the perfect is concerned. In the previous section, it was pointed out that in Michaelis™ framework the perfect is a phasal aspectual operator that maps an event onto a state. I have baked a cake is a state on this approach. Accordingly, the aspectual property Michaelis assigns to the general perfect is stativity (p. 172), irrespective of the aspectual properties of the comple- ment. Michaelis™ approach appears to be problematic in several respects. The idea of stativity is obviously linked to the view that the (present) perfect communicates ‚pre- sent relevance™, which is discussed on pp. 155-157, 162-163. When the situation is telic (e.g. I have baked a cake or They have had their hedge trimmed), it is not hard to find the result (i.e. the state) referred to (i.e. There is a cake on the table or The hedge is in a trimmed state). However, when the situation is atelic, pinning down the result is already less straightforward. Still, one might argue that the state conferred by I have spoken to John is I know about the problem or He intends to change jobs. In other words, there is a stative conversational implicature of some sort.* Michaelis™ approach is more problematic when one takes into account present perfect progres- sive sentences of the indefinite type, i.e. there is reference to a situation that is com- pleted before the moment of speaking. A corpus investigation (cf. r)epraetere, 1999) has revealed that inde~nite progressive perfect sentences in most cases just serve to indicate that someone has been involved in an activity before the moment of speak- ing; there is by no means always an intention of communicating a present result.Y Examples of this type are no doubt the most difficult to account for in Michaelis™ model because it is not the primary aim of the speaker to refer to a present result; he just wants to inform the speaker that an activity has taken place.‚O (1) Meanwhile, as such strategic investments have mounted, the merchant-banking arim of Rey™s Omni Holding has been busily buying and selling dozens of com- panies, often after a financial or corporate restructuring. (WSJ2c)l™ (2) What has he been doing lately? - He has been assisting as a batting coach. A possible counterargument might be that the indefinite pro~~-ess~~~e perfect does not inherit the stativity factor from the general perfect. However, this would not explain why, in some cases (e.g. You are late - I ha>,e been watching a documentary on the * Cf. Depraetere (1998) for a discussion of the status (implicatures or not?) of the resultative proposi- tions commonly associated with the simple present perfect of the indefinite type. 9 In Depraetere (I 999) it is pointed out that the indefinite present of the so-called ‚explanatory-resulta- tive type™ (Her eyes are red. She™s been crying) is far less often used than seems to be suggested by the attention it tends to get in grammars. lo In Depraetere (1998) I advanced a similar hypothesis (i.e. current relevance is inherent in the semantics of the perfect). Having studied the indefinite progressive perfect (cf. Depraetere, to appear), I realise that this hypo~esis is not tenable unless one disregards particular sentences with an indefinite progressive perfect. I1 WSJ stands for Waif Stwef Journal. 456 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 449465 dioxin scandal), the indefinite progressive perfect does communicate results (cf. Depraetere, 1999). As I see it, the observation that the perfect gives rise to stative inferences in many, but not all cases, is not sufficient to justify the claim that stativity is the core mean- ing of the perfect and that it is therefore an aspectual operator. What the indefinite perfect communicates ciearly is that a situation has held before the moment of speaking. As pointed out by Reichenbach (1947) the present perfect and the preterite differ in terms of internal temporal structure: whereas the preterit has a past refer- ence time that coincides with event time (E,R - S), the reference time of the present perfect is the moment of speaking and the event time precedes the reference time (E - R,S). I believe that it follows from the temporal make-up of the perfect that ‚pre- sent results™ are likely to be communicated, but defining the semantics of the perfect basically in terms of stativity seems to be putting the cart before the horse. Michaelis does associate an anteriority relation with the perfect (cf. previous section), but it is not clear why this part of the meaning of the perfect is subordinate to the fact that it communicates stativity. 4.2. How many perfects? Elsness refers to McCawley™s (1971) article, in which four types of perfect are distinguished: the universal perfect, the existential perfect, the hot news perfect and the stative (i.e. resultative) perfect. He agrees with the later development, in which the four classes were fused into two, namely the universal (i.e. continuative, the sit- uation continues up to the moment of speaking) and the existential (i.e. indefinite, the situation lies completely before the temporal zero-point) perfect ‚senses™ (p. 76). Elsness is very careful in his answer to the question whether the indefinite and con- tinuative perfects are two ‚uses™ of the perfect rather than two different per- fects: ﬁSince for one thing the distinction between the two is not always clear-cut, and secondly they have one fundamental characteristic, namely their temporal range, in common. the English present perfect can largely be seen as one unitary semantic categoryﬂ (p. 76). Michaelis™ view is much more outspoken. She argues (convincingly) that the differ- ences in constraints on the ‚types™ of present perfect she distinguishes (i.e. the resul- tative perfect, My car has beet? stolen, the existential or experiential perfect, Have you seen the motet ex~~ibition~ and the continuative perfect, 1 huve been bored all day) justify the conclusion that they have different semantics or, in constructional grammar terms, are distinct grammatical constructions, i.e. pairings of form and meaning.‚* Although the PaP (past perfect) is similarly three-ways ambiguous (p. I2 The resultative perfect, unlike the existential (experiential) perfect, does not combine with an adver- bial indicating a definite past time: I™ve made toast (resultative or existential), I™ve made toast at noon (existential interpretation only) (p. 115). Moreover, it is only the resultative perfect that does not com- bine with a ‚pure™ manner adverbial (p. 257): Ucrr committee chair has (?? angrily) tendered his resig- nation, Our committee chair has angrily tendered his resignation elaery time we have asked him to take a controversial stand on something. Another characteristic of the resultative perfect is that it is not capa- Book review i Lingua 110 &?OOO) 449465 457 142), none of the semantic and grammatical constraints typical of the present perfect (cf. footnote 12) apply to the past perfect (p. 117). In fact, Michaelis™ observations about whether or not there is a unitary past perfect are not fully consistent. On p. 117, for instance, she points out that there is no grammatical evidence that supports an ambiguity analysis of the past perfect (ﬁBy and large, it [grammatical evidence] is not [available]ﬁ). On p. 144, she repeats that ﬁcertain semantic and grammatical ramifications of that ambiguity are unique to the PrPﬂ. Still, she concludes that the PaP can be analysed in a similar way, but ﬁthe individual constructions [i.e. distinct pairings of form and meaning] require less elaborate statementsﬂ (p. 144). However, in the visual representation of the perfect system given on p. 210, the past perfect is not represented as consisting of three different constructions, whereas the PrP is: there is an abstract General PrP that is linked with the three different senses of the perfect through inheritance links. In other words, the conclusion must be that there is a unitary PaP after all, as it is the existence of idiosyncratic constraints that is taken as evidence for the fact that the PrP is ~biguous (cf. pp. 227-234). A point that needs to be added here is that in Michaelis™ opinion, the preterite and the resultative present perfect only differ in pragmatic terms. They both evoke a unique time but the resultative PrP expresses deictic temporal reference whereas the preterite may be anaphoric (p. 226) in the sense that it may ﬁrefer . , . back to a lin- guistic or extra-linguistic temporal antecedentﬂ (p. 217). Michaelis explains that in Old and Middle English the preterite and resultative perfect were largely inter- changeable. I3 The fact that two forms are semantically commensurate implies that, little by little, they come to be seen as functionally opposed: pragmatic differences are likely to arise: ﬁIn modem English, the resultative PrP and the preterite partici- pate in a discourse-pragmatic opposition; the preterite is the unmarked member of this opposition. This opposition arises from the contrast between anaphoric and deic- tic dete~ination of reference timeﬂ (p, 2 17). Michaelis takes the different co-occur- rence restrictions on the different present perfects as evidence for the fact that they ble of denoting a pragmatically presupposed event (*How have your urr-ived at your derision?) (p. 143). The existential perfect differs from the resultative perfect in that it has the ‚present-possibility™ require- ment, that is, it ﬁrefers to an event that could be instantiated at presentﬂ (cf. ?Assytia has had many wise rulers - Syria has had many wise rulers) (p. 144). Another difference is that two clauses with existential perfects may refer to a series of events or an event complex, as Michaelis calls it (p. 2.54). The resulta- tive perfect does not allow this reading: the perfects in I have cleaned the house and then fed the dog (p. 253) can only be interpreted as existential perfects. Cf. pp. 234-242 for a comparison between the existential and the continuative perfect. ﬂ Elsness is not completely in accord with Michaelis, although it must be stressed that unlike Michaelis, he is more interested in the number of occurrences of particular forms. In his conclusion he writes that ﬁthe distribution between that verb from [the present perfect] and the preterite is characterised by a rapid and consistent increase in the frequency of the present perfect, mainly at the expense of the preterite, from Old English through Middle English up until early Modern English, from a very modest beginning of less that one per cent of all recorded perfect/preterite verb forms in Old English to thirteen per cent in the period 15.50-1600, by which time the present perfect with auxiliary HAVE has become firmly established as the clear number-two form in references to past time . . Within the Modern Eng- lish section of our corpus the development of the present ~~ect/preterite distribution is less clear and fess consistent than in Old and Middle English. The rapid increase in the ratio between the present per- fect and the preterite discontinues, but the further details vary considerablyﬂ (1997: 340). 458 Book review I Lingua I1 0 (2000) 449-465 are distinct constructions (cf. e.g. p. 115). From that point of view, it seems strange that in the case of the distinction preterite-resultative perfect, no similar conclusion is drawn from the same observation (*I have seen him yesterday, I saw him yester- day). 4.3. Compositional analysis of the perfect? It is commonly known that the present perfect, unlike the other perfect forms (past, future, non-finite forms) does not usually combine with definite past time markers, and this brings up the question whether a compositional analysis (past per- fect = perfect + preterite, present perfect = perfect + present tense) is appropriate. In view of the idiosyncracies of the present perfect, Elsness believes it is not appropri- ate to adopt a compositional analysis, a decision which, in his view, clears the way for the tense approach to the present perfect, but not to the other perfect forms. That is, the past perfect and the non-finite perfect forms should not be recognised as tenses as they express relative rather than deictic temporal reference. (p. 349) Michaelis agrees with Elsness as far as the rejection of a compositional analysis is concerned. However, she does not follow him in his conclusion that the present per- fect is a tense (cf. section 4.2). As pointed out before, the perfect is seen as a phasal aspectual operator that maps an event onto a state. Michaelis starts from Klein™s (1992) compositional analysis of the perfect and shows that certain combinations of the perfect and tense are more than the sum of their parts. The fact that the co-occur- rence restrictions on the present perfect (cf. footnote 12) do not apply to the past per- fect is taken as evidence for the fact that a compositional approach to the perfect constructions cannot be upheld. She writes: ﬁif the only difference between PrP and PaP is the location of the temporal reference point (i.e. whether that point is past or present), then we would not expect that a grammatically ramified ambiguity which characterizes the PrP does not also characterize the Papﬂ (p. 118) and ﬁ[tlhe seman- tic and grammatical features exhibited by members of the perfect system cannot be explained on the basis of a cross-cutting system of tense and aspect specifications. Therefore, the meaning of a given perfect type is not reducible to the interaction of tense and aspectﬂ (p. 120). Michaelis quite rightly points out that the observation that sentences like I have made toast are ambiguous (between an existential and a resultative reading) is quite incompatible with the compositional approach, because the compositional approach entails that not more than one interpretation can be asso- ciated with a given complex structure. 4.4. Aktionsart vs. aspect: What about (un)boundedness? 4.4.1. Problem Following Lyons (1977), Elsness uses the term ‚aspectual character™ (p. 50) to refer to Aktionsart. He decides to use the labels ‚bounded/unbounded™ to refer to the Aktionsart distinction ‚telic/atelic™: ﬁ One important criterion distinguishing between these aspectual classes is the telic/atelic distinction, closely related to the distinction between bounded and unbounded situations and predicates, which are the terms we Book review t Lingt*a ii0 ~2~f)O~ 449-165 459 shall prefer. The latter pair of terms emphasise the fact that this distinction has to do with whether or not the situation can be associated with distinct temporal endpoints. Achievements and accomplishments are bounded, activities and states are unboundedﬂ (p. 50). Elsness also writes: ﬁthe distinction between states and activi- ties is sometimes difficult to draw. Both are unbounded and combine with temporal adverbials of the set ‚for . . ﬁ™ (p. 51). The question Elsness does not address is what the aspectual character of She worked for three hours and She lived in England for three years is. Are these bounded situations because they are associated with ‚dis- tinct temporal endings™ or are they unbounded all the same (because they clearly designate respectively an activity and a state)? What exactly is meant by ‚associated with distinct temporal endpoints™ ? Is it potential endpoints that are the decisive cri- terion or does the sentence actually have to present the endpoints as being reached in order for it to be qualified as bounded? 4.42. ~~n)bound~d~ess vs. ~a)te~i~ity in De~ler~k (1991) and Dept™aetere (1995) Following Declerck (1991), I argued in Depraetere (1995) that it is necessary to distinguish between (un)boundedness and (a)telicity. The latter class refers to one of the traditional situation type distinctions, which hinges on whether or not a situation (as it is described in the sentence)14 has an inherent or intended endpoint which has to be reached in order for the situation to be complete beyond which the situation (as it is described in the sentence) cannot continue (cf. Depraetere, 1995: 2)‚ﬂ Bound- edness, on the other hand, has to do with the actual reaching of a temporal boundary. It should be clear that it is not because there is an inherent endpoint in a situation, that it is necessarily/always reached. This approach offers a solution to Dowty™s imperfective paradox. Elsness actually refers to Dowty™s well-known example John was wa~kjn~ to the station, of which Dowty said that it contained three aspectual classes: ﬁThe lexical verb walk is an activity. The verb phrase walk tu the station is an accomplishment . . . , and the sentence as a whole is a stative because of its pro- gressive tenseﬂ (1986: 44). Elsness comments: I4 Elsness stresses the fact that it is not only the verb that determines aspectual class: all constituents may do so. In a footnote. he adds the observation that a ﬁbounded predicate is one denoting a bounded situationﬂ (p. 365). To be entirely accurate, it should be pointed out that situations are not inherently telic or atelic. It is actually situations as they are described in sentences that can be telic or atelic. If someone is preparing dinner, I can say ‚Matilde is baking a quiche™ or ‚Matilde is working in the kitchen™. In the former case, the situation is represented as telic, in the latter it is not, but it remains a fact that both sentences can be used to refer to the same situation (cf. Michaelis, 1998: 19). ﬂ It is useful to point out that Michaelis defines ‚telicity™ and ‚atehcity™ differently (Table 1.2., p. 64). In her opinion, these terms are both subclasses of the event situation type, telic events being ‚events which have goal states™, atelic events being ‚events lacking any intrinsic endpoints™. Activities are included in the class of atelic events and Michaelis distinguishes between homogenous activities (e.g. Harry slept, Harry wore a sweater) and heterogeneous activities (e.g. Harry jogged). The former arc said to be events because they have (implicitly) limited duration (p. 18); the latter are events because they have distinct subphases (p. 18). Michaelis explains why she believes achievements should be clas- sified as telic. However, when refuting Brinton™s analysis of the meaning of the perfect, Michaelis does not mention that fact that B&ton™s use (1988: 54) of the term ‚telic situation™ differs from Michaelis™: it does not include achievements. 460 Book review I Lingua I1 0 (2000) 449465 ﬁMany would say that Dowty™s last observation is a matter of aspect rather than aspectual class or char- acter: that (2: 130) [Dowty™s example] has a bounded (accomplishment) predicate (c< walk to the sta- tion j>), which is reported as imperfective by the use of the progressive verb form. Semantically, how- ever, there can be no clear distinction between aspect and aspectual character: for a reference to be bounded it is necessary both that the predicate itself is bounded and that the aspect is perfective, i.e. non- progressive in the case of English. The progressive form has the effect of turning an otherwise bounded predicate into an unbounded one: <<She wrote a letter.,, is bounded, uShe was writing a letter,,, is unboundedﬂ ( 1997 : 52) As I see it, it is infelicitous to claim that an aspectual category changes the situa- tion type of a sentence: there appears to be an inherent endpoint in both John was walking to the station and John walked to the station, the difference being that in the latter sentence the situation is not described as actually reaching the intended end- point. In any case, Elsness avoids the problem when analysing the data in his cor- pus: when classifying the corpus examples in terms of aspectual character, he writes: ﬁverbal aspect (i.e. the occurrence of a progressive verb form) was not gen- erally taken into account, although it is clear that the progressive will serve to render an otherwise bounded predicate unbounded. That particular problem, does not, of course, affect the verb forms at the focus of attention in this study: the (non-pro- gressive) present perfect and preteriteﬂ (1997 : 19 1). We need to add that non-progressive/progressive is not synonymous with bounded/unbounded: although the use of a progressive usually brings about an unbounded reading, this is not always the case: indefinite progressive perfect sen- tences (cf. 1, 2), for instance, are bounded in spite of the presence of the progressive marker. Nor is it the case that in order for an unbounded reading to arise, a sentence has to be progressive: I live in Gentbrugge is unbounded although non-progressive. On the approach outlined here, She workedfor three hours and She lived in Eng- landfor three years are atelic (activities and states) situations, but they are bounded. Already from an intuitive point of view, it appears that the endpoints in He baked a cake and She finished the article are of a different nature than the endpoint referred to in what I call bounded atelic sentences. Before I discuss each of Michaelis™ operators, I would like to show that my approach to (a)telicity and (un)boundedness is not only justified on a theoretical level, but also on the explanatory level (cf. e.g. Depraetere, 1995: 13-17, for other evidence to this effect). A first point that needs to be stressed is that sentences with quantified NPs are not necessarily telic (or even bounded), contrary to the view commonly advanced in texts dealing with situation types. Let us take the sentences in (3) as a starting point: (3) a. He smoked a cigarette. (telic, bounded) b. He smoked seven cigarettes. (atelic, bounded) (consecutive reading) Whereas there is an inherent endpoint in smoke a cigarette there is no similar built- in endpoint in smoke seven cigarettes. What is referred to here is to an (atelic) activ- ity of smoking cigarettes; the ashtray reveals afterwards that seven cigarettes have been smoked (bounded). In other words, (3b) is atelic and bounded. The sentences in (4) prove that this hypothesis makes sense: Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 449465 461 (4) a. He was smoking a cigarette. b. *??He was smoking 7 cigarettes. Telic sentences normally allow the use of the progressive. In existing accounts, there is no way to distinguish between smoke a cigarette and smoke seven cigarettes (both are considered to be telic) and because of that, it is impossible to explain why (4b) is unacceptable. As I see it, smoke seven cigarettes is not telic but bounded. The progressive cannot be used for the following reason: progressive aspect brings about an unbounded reading when combined with a past tense marker. Sentence (4b) is unacceptable because of the clash between the unbounded nature of the past pro- gressive and the bounded reading established by the quantified NP. Sentence (4b) is acceptable only if there is an intended endpoint in the situation (e.g. a betting con- text), i.e. if the sentence is telic. However, the telic interpretation is pragmatically not very likely. There is no similar ‚fight™ in (4a): the sentence is telic and unbounded. On my approach, the incompatibility between the unboundedness inher- ent in the progressive and the bounding effect of the quantified NPs explains why the progressive cannot be used in (4b).16 At first sight, it appears odd that (5) is acceptable in view of the fact that (4b) is not. However, it is only acceptable if it refers to a situation in which 20 people are helped simultaneously (unbounded atelic situation), for instance, when a nurse is attending to 20 patients (whenever they need help). It is not acceptable when there is reference to a bounded series of people being helped. Another (admittedly absurd) possibility would be when someone decides to help twenty people and to stop the activity of helping as soon as the quotum of twenty has been reached. On this read- ing, help twenty people is telic and the progressive can also be used: (5) He was helping 20 people. (atelic unbounded) (?telic unbounded) In other words, the observations made show that quantified NPs may affect Aktionsart ((a)telicity) as well as (un)boundedness and that they may do so in dif- ferent ways: (1) The quantified NP may be part of a telic proposition: there is either reference to an inherent endpoint or an intended endpoint. In these cases, the progressive marker can be used. (2) The quantified NP may bring about a bounded reading. If it does, it is not likely to combine with a progressive marker, because of the tension between the When discussing the incompatibility of the progressive with durational adverbials (e.g. ?Larr-y was talking on the phone with Joe yesterday for three hours, ?Anne was working on her novel last week for two days straight, p. 97), Michaelis explains that ﬁby presenting the D-situation [denoted situation] as one having temporal bounds, one defeats the purpose of the progressive construalﬂ (p. 103), which is to refer to an event time that is properly included in the reference time. I believe that the line of reasoning I adopt to account for the unacceptability of certain uses of the progressive with quantified NPs is in line with what Michaelis says about durational adverbials, which also tend to bound (in our sense) a situation. 462 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 449465 boundedness inherent in the quantified NP and the unboundedness inherent in the progressive marker. (3) The quantified NP may neither bring about a bounded nor a telic reading. This is the case when all the referents of the NP are involved at the same time in the situation. The progressive marker can be used in this case. What the examples discussed show above all is that we cannot account for the (un)acceptability of the sentences in (3) to (5) unless we take into account (un)boundedness. 4.4.3. Perfectivising and stativising operators 4.4.3.1. The progressive (stativising). The existence of what I call bounded states and unbounded events no doubt lies at the basis of Michaelis™ construction of a very dynamic system involving a threefold aspectual distinction. When discussing a sen- tence like Harry was repairing the fence (cf. Dowty™s, 1986, imperfective paradox) she points out that ﬁthis progressive sentence denotes a situation whose aspectual class [i.e. state] differs from that of the content-verb denotatum [i.e. event]ﬂ (p. 4). As I see it, there is an inherent endpoint in both Harry repaired the fence and Harry was repairing the fence, the difference being that in the latter sentence the situation is not described as actually reaching the inherent endpoint whereas in the former it is. In my view, Harry was repairing the fence is unbounded, but it remains telic. It is the progressive that has the effect of representing the situation as unbounded, without, however, affecting its situation type class: the potential endpoint is still there. Calling Harry was repairing the fence a state seems to do injustice to the fact that this sentence retains the endpoint inherent in its Aktionsart make-up. Michaelis™ characterisation of the progressive marker is problematic in other respects as well: Michaelis points out that ﬁphasal aspect necessarily encodes an aspectual char- acterization at odds with the Aktionsart type of the VP-complement denotatumﬂ (p. 59, cf. also p. 181). From this it follows that stativising phasal markers can only be added to events. In her view, this explains the ungrammaticality of *My students are knowing the answer: know the answer is a(n Aktionsart) state, accordingly, it is impossible to ‚stativize™ the situation by means of the progressive. At first sight, this explanation seems to make the wrong predictions for I am living on 51st St, which is acceptable. Michaelis offers the following solution: live on 51st street is a state to which there is likely to come an end. From that point of view, it acquires a dynamic element. Accordingly, she calls it an event and the acceptable use of the progressive is accounted for. In cases like these, there is an ‚internal conversion™ process. Marge is happy (p. 66), on the other hand, is seen by the conceptualiser as a situation with- out bounds, hence as a state and accordingly, the progressive is out (cf. also p. 59, p. 181, p. 184). As I see it, there is a danger of circularity in this line of reasoning. Even though Michaelis stresses the fact that it is conceptualisation that is the impor- tant criterion, it is not clear to me what reasons may be adduced in favour of the claim that being happy is conceptualised as less transient than living in a certain street. The question arises as to whether it will not be the impossibility to use the Book review i Lingua I10 (ZOOOj 449465 463 progressive rather than some independent principle that will be taken as evidence for the claim that there is no internal conversion, i.e. that the state is not conceptualised as an event. Moreover, the question remains how one can account for the acceptable use off cove been working in the garden: work in the garden is dynamic, so it can take the progressive marker, but how can one explain that the perfect marker, a sta- tivising operator, can be added? i am working in the garden is a state, stativising operators can only be added to events, accordingly, I have been working in the gar- den should be out.17 4.4.3.2. ~~rat~o~a~ adverb~a~s ~perfectiv~singj. Not all pe~ectivising operators are aspectual operators. For instance, durational adverbials may also have the effect of mapping a state (Harry was in the basement) onto an event (Harry was in the base- ment for ten minutes). Following Herweg (199 I), Michaelis classifies Harry was in the basement fur ten minutes as an event, because it does not have the characteris- tics typically associated with states: it lacks the distributivity property (no subpart of being in the basement for ten minutes is the same as being in the basement for ten minutes) and it ﬁentails a point of culmination within the evoked past interval (i.e., the time at which the ten-minute period is over)ﬂ (p, 24, cf. also p. 186). Although the state is definitely bounded, I would not go as far as claiming that it is an event, I would rather argue that it is a bounded state and would describe Harry was in the basement for ten minutes as an event only in case it was Harry™s aim to stay in the basement for ten minutes, i.e. when there is an element of agentivity or intention (cf. Depraetere, 1995: 2) that makes it telic. As I see it, the kind of endpoint (i.e. inher- ent in telic sentences vs. non-inherent in the bounded state sentence) already shows that these are ‚events™ of a very different type. Moreover, a practical problem with Michaelis™ approach is that if Harry was in the basement for ten rn~n~tes was an event, it would allow the progressive marker (*Harry was being in the basement), which it does not. Michaelis herself points out that this type of event differs from ‚ordinary™ events in that it does not combine with a punctual time adverb (cp. The police arrested the suspect at three vs. *The suspect was in custody for two hours at three, p. 100).‚8 This again shows that classifying sentences of this type as events is not completely justified. We need the concept of (un)boundedness if we are to I7 Michaelis points to this problem herself. She argues that Sid has been complaking incessanrly (p. 83) is acceptable in spite of the fact that the perfect is applied to a stative complement (i.e. Sid be - com- plaining incessantly). It is because we have to do with a continuative perfect, which ﬁrequires an imper- fective complement, but the R-situation receives an eventive construal in this constructional context. The eventive construal is that associated with a state phase, whether or not that phase is explicitly assigned a duration by means of a durational adverb like for two hoursﬂ (83-84). This explanation appears rather axiomatic or ‚after-the-facts™ and it is not clear whether it can also be applied to indefinite progressive perfect sentences. It should also be added that it does not matter in which order the operators are applied (first perfect, then progressive or vice versa), the problem remains because both operators bring about a state reading and cannot be added to states. I8 The following quote also bears evidence to the same awareness: ﬁIt is not enough to say that a given exponent of phasal aspect - e.g. the perfect or progressive - denotes a state predication, since, as we have seen, the behavior of state ~~e~icur~ons per se is distinct in a number of respects from that of 4 derived )> states denoted by phasal-aspect constructionsﬂ (p. 185). 464 Book review I Lingua I IO (2000) 449-465 devise a slot into which sentences of the type Harry was in the easement fur 10 minutes fit. 4.4.3.3. Terminative and inceptive constructions (perfectivising). Sentences (with states and activities) implying a right-hand boundary (terminative aspect) or a left- hand boundary (inceptive aspect) are respectively called bounded to the right and bounded to the left in Declerek (1991: 128) and Depraetere (1996: 52-53). These are also sentences types which Michaelis prefers to classify as events. 4.4.3.4. The perfect (stativising). The final phasal aspectual operator is the perfect. Michaelis explains that the perfect maps an event predication onto a state predication (e.g. badge has swal~awed thefly). For reasons pointed out in section 4.2, this asser- tion seems problematic. From an explanatory point of view as well, an approach that classifies perfect sentences as state, i.e. as unbounded, is problematic. As I see it, the use of a simple indefinite perfect has a bounding effect: I have lived in Brussels rep- resents a situation as having reached a temporal boundary (cf. Depraetere, 1995: 12-131, unlike, for instance, I live in Brussels. The explanatory value of such an approach is clear when one tries to account for the (impossibility of the) alteration between absolute and relative tenses when time relations are expressed in subclauses (cf. Depraetere 1995: 14, 1996: 84-106, 123-124, 146153). Michaelis™ decision to distinguish situation aspect and viewpoint aspect needs to be applauded. I agree with Michaelis that the latter type of aspectuality plays a far more impo~ant role in explaining language use than it is usually thought to do (for instance, to explain (a) certain uses of relative rather than absolute tenses, (b) the movement of reference time, (c) certain restrictions on the combination of the pro- gressive and quantified NPs) but I do not follow her when she says that the phasal aspectual operators or adverbials override the inherent aspectual class or change events into states and vice versa. Calling, for instance, bounded atelic sentences events, or unbounded telic sentences states, just seems too drastic: it sweeps away any trace of their situation type make-up. My critical remarks notwithstanding, it remains a fact that Michaelis™ book is absolutely fascinating: it is extremely rich and provides the reader with a lot of food for thought. It is certain to have a profound impact on research on aspect and the perfect. References Anderson, J.M., 1973. An essay concerning aspect (Janua Linguarum, Series Minor 167). Berlin: Mou- ton. Brinton, L., 1988. The development of English aspectual systems. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Comrie, B., 1976. Aspect. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Declerck, R., 1991. Tense in English: Its structure and use in discourse. London: Routledge. Depraetere, I., 1995. On the necessity of distinguishing (a)telicity and (un)boundedness. Linguistics and Philosophy 18: 1-19. Depraetere, I., 1996. The tense system in English relative clauses: A corpus-based analysis. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Book review I Lingua If0 (2000) 449-465 465 Depraetere, I., 1998. On the resultative character of present perfect sentences. Journal of Pragmatics 29(5): 597-613. Depraetere, I., 1999. A taxonomy of indefinite progressive perfect sentences. In: B. Devriendt, S. Geukens and G. Tops (eds), Studies in honour of X. Dekeyser. 227-238. Leuven: Peeters. Dowty, D., 1986. The effects of aspectual class on the temporal structure of discourse: semantics or pragmatics? Linguistics and Philosophy 9, 37-6 1. Herweg, M., 1991. Perfective and imperfective aspect and the theory of events and states. Linguistics 29, 969-1010. Klein, W., 1992. The present perfect puzzle. Language 88, 525-552. Lyons, J., 1977. Semantics, ~01s. 1-2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. McCawley, J.D., 1971. Tense and time reference in English. In: C.J. Fillmore and D. Terence Langen- doen (eds,), Studies in linguistic semantics, 96-l 13. Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Reichenbach, H., 1947. Elements of symbolic logic. New York: Free Press. 