Lingua 110 (2000) 467-47 1 Book review Ton van der Wouden, Negative contexts: Collocation, polarity and rn~It~p~e nega- tion. London: Routledge, 1998. Reviewed by Elena Herburger, Department of Spanish and Portuguese, George- town University, Washington DC 20057- 1039, USA. Ton van der Wouden notes that he intends his book not only as scholarly work (it is a revised and expanded version of his 1994 Groningen dissertation), but also as a reference work and as a possible textbook for a course on negation. Given its breadth of coverage, the wealth of obse~ations and depth of analysis it contains and its extensive bibliography, I think Negative contexts accomplishes what it sets out to do. Two central topics of the book which I will address here are the licensing of Nega- tive Polarity Items and Negative Concord. Since these issues have received a great deal of attention both in the semantic and syntactic literature, I think ~egati~~e con- texts is of great help to everyone interested in negation, semanticists and syntacti- cians alike. The book is divided into three main parts. The first part deals with collocations, fixed combinations of lexical items, that is, which can be idiomatic or compositional in their meaning. The second part analyzes the distribution of polarity items (both negative and positive). The last section is devoted to the interpretation of multiple negations. Under this rubric the author discusses not only Negative Concord, which seems to be the main phenomenon, but also paratactic negation, litotes, denial, emphatic negation and resumptive negation. In his discussion of collocation or fixed expressions, van der Wouden shows that there exists a wide range of collocations in natural language. To just name very few examples from English, consider a swarm of bees, a flock of sea g&s, fond of, adjacent to, work hard, sleep soundly, two™s company, three™s a crowd, odds and ends. Various ways of looking at collocations that have been proposed in the liter- ature are discussed. It is shown that no unified analysis of this phenomenon is available because although many collocations make sense to a certain degree, it lies in the very nature of collocations that they are idiosyncratic and involve phonolog- ical, syntactic, semantic, pragmatic and frequency factors which are difficult to the- orize about. Still, van der Wouden argues, collocation is an important phenomenon because it is found everywhere in language. In particular, he claims, polarity items ~24-3841/99/$ - see front matter 0 1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: 50024-384 1(99)00045-5 468 Book review I Lingua II0 (2000) 467-471 are part of collocations; their distribution requires the company of certain other elements. As it contains a great deal of observations that are not normally paid attention to in regular linguistic texts (at least not the ones I am familiar with), I found this sec- tion very interesting and instructive. And it seems true that the distribution of polar- ity items is an instance of collocation. What I think, however, could have been high- lighted more are the specific insights that one gains by looking at the distribution of polarity items in terms of collocation. The way the book is written, a reader who skips section one and only reads sections two and three would have little, if any trou- ble in making sense of what she is reading. As mentioned above, the second section is devoted to polarity items and their col- locational behavior, their distribution, that is. In line with the Groningen project on negation, of which van der Wouden™s previous work has formed an important part, the author argues that polarity items are not only sensitive to the semantic property of downward entailingness, but also to the finer-grained notions of anti-additivity and anti-multiplicativity. Let me briefly summarize these properties. As is well-known, a context is downward entailing if it licenses an inference from sets to subsets. For instance, not is monotone decreasing because (la) entails (lb): (1) a. Mary didn™t call. b. Mary didn™t call from a public phone. Among the elements that license downward inferences, some are special in that they give rise to certain equivalences (cf. de Morgan™s Laws). Thus, on top of licensing downward inferences, some elements are antimultiplicative, which they are when f(XuY) = f(X)nf(Y). Not, for instance, is antimultiplicative, which is shown by the fact (2a) is exactly true when (2b) is: (2) a. John doesn™t smoke and drink. b. John doesn™t smoke or John doesn™t drink. Finally, an element is anti-additive when f(XuY) = f(X)nf(Y). Not is also anti-addi- tive, as can be seen by the equivalence of (3a) and (3b): (3) a. John doesn™t smoke or drink. b. John doesn™t smoke and John doesn™t drink. Whereas not is not only downward monotonic, but also antimultiplicative and anti- additive, other negative elements are not as strong. Specifically, van der Wouden shows that not every, not always antimultiplicative, but not anti-additive. Con- versely, nobody, never, nothing, refuse, deny are anti-additive, but not antimulti- plicative, and, finally, and few, seldom, hardly, almost nobody are merely monotone decreasing. Relying on the various semantic criteria that he has established, the author care- fully distinguishes between various kinds of polarity items, both positive and nega- Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 467-471 469 tive. The examples that are discussed are mostly from Dutch, but examples from other languages, including English, are also dealt with. To mention some, a bit is ‚strong™ NPI in that it can only be licensed in contexts that are antimultiplicative and anti-additive. Yet is an NPI of ‚medium™ strength since it is licensed in anti-additive contexts, regardless of whether they are antimultiplicative or not. Finally, any is an example of a ‚weak™ NPI, an NPI, that is, that can occur in all downward entailing contexts. It is worth noting in this context that in going through the data, van der Wouden takes great care to not hide the problems of the classification (cf. chapter 6), which he notes ﬁis an idealization in the sense that every polarity item has its own unique, idiosyncratic distributionﬂ (p. 113). Idealization though it is, it seems a very useful one. In the last part of the book, van der Wouden turns to multiple negations, includ- ing Negative Concord. Following van der Wouden and Zwarts (1993), he distin- guishes between two types, ‚negative spread™ and ‚negative doubling™. The differ- ence between the two is that negative doubling involves what looks like an instance of ordinary sentential negation (not), whereas negative spread does not, but only involves a series of n-words in the scope of a negative element which can itself be an n-word. Thus (4) is an instance of negative spread, (5) an instance of negative doubling, and (6) is a combination of both: (4) Personne a rien dit (French) ‚Nobody said anything™ (5) Je n™ai vu personne ‚I have not seen anybody™ (6) Personne n™a rien dit ‚Nobody said anything™ The proposed analysis can roughly be summarized like this. N-words like French personne, rien, Italian neSsun0 etc. have a context dependent semantics; depending on the environment they appear in, they shift their meaning from negative quantifiers (cf. Standard English nobody) to existential quantifiers (cf. any). Similarly, negation, depending on the context it appears in, is either interpreted as a real negation, or as a semantically vacuous, negative polarity counterpart (identity function). When do these meaning shifts occur? In the case of negative spread, an n-word that occurs in the scope of another appropriate negative element is interpreted as an existential quantifier (p. 188). Thus, in (4) personne means ‚nobody™ and rien, which appears in its scope, shifts its meaning from ‚nothing™ to ‚anything™ as an instance of negative spread. In contrast, when negative doubling is involved, the n-words remain gen- uinely negative and what shifts its meaning is the negation (p. 198). Thus, in (5) per- mnne is interpreted as ‚nobody™, and it is responsible for ne being interpreted as being semantically vacuous rather than a semantic negation. (6) is an interesting case in that it involves a combination of negative spread and negative doubling. As I understood it, personne here is negative (‚nobody™) and performs two roles; it trig- gers negative spread turning rien into ‚anything™ and it triggers negative doubling, as a result of which ne behaves semantically as if it were not there. Italian is argued to 470 Book review i Lingua 1 I5 (2555) 467-471 be similar to French, except that negative doubling is said to be triggered only from left to right, i.e. only by postverbal n-words. This is argued to explain why the equiv- alent of (6) is not possible in Italian. Afrikaans, unlike French and Italian, is said to only have negative doubling, but not negative spread (see below). Van der Wouden™s analysis covers an impressive array of facts, only some of which have been mentioned here (e.g. I have not included his analysis of Catalan Negative Concord). While very successful, the analysis, like virtually every analysis, also raises some questions. I would like to mention two. One unresolved issue is the systematic ambiguity that n-words give rise to in cer- tain contexts. It is said that ‚~[almbiguity only occurs in special, understandable, casesﬂ, as in (8) (p. 185, fn. 9): (8) Nao exigi que ninguem fosse preso. (Portuguese) Not required-I that nobody be arrested ‚I didn™t require that anybody be arrested.™ ‚I didn™t require that nobody be arrested.™ It is not explained, however, how (8) can be understood on the proposed analysis, It seems to me that the analysis predicts that ninguem, being postverbal, is a negative quantifier (‚nobody™) that triggers an NPI reading of nao to its right as an instance of negative doubling. Consequently, the sentence should mean ‚I required that nobody be arrested™. This may arguably account for the first reading, but it clearly does not capture the second one. Another question that the reader may have concerns the treatment of Afrikaans. This language is said to lack negative doubling, and only have negative spread. The prediction this makes is that if a sentence contains a negation (nie) and an even num- ber of n-words, say two, then the sentence should not be semantically negative, but a logical double negation. The reason is that, on the one hand, nie, being a doubling negation, does not contribute to the interpretation. On the other hand, the two n- words, both being negative, cancel each other out as an instance of double negation. Although the author does not say this, I think that this prediction is important because if it is not borne out it is not obvious why we should distinguish between negative spread and negative doubling in the first place. If the prediction did not hold, then, one may ask, what would prevent us from analyzing the alleged cases of nega- tive doubling as cases of negative spread where the negation is genuinely negative and the n-words in its scope shift their interpretation from universal negative to exis- tential? Van der Wouden does note that in Afrikaans ﬁthe occurrence of more than one negative quantifier in a sentence results in (logical) double negationﬂ. (p. 192). However, no example of this is given, and the examples that are given in footnote 1™7 (p. 192) show that the opposite is at least sometimes the case. In (9), for instance, the second n-word geniemand is not interpreted as ‚nobody™ but as ‚anybody™: (9) Permissie het hy not no&t van geniemand gevra nie. Permission has he yet never of nobody-at-all asked not. ‚He has never asked anybody™s permission yet.™ Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 467-171 471 Some further discussion of this issue would have been helpful because it seems to be quite important to the analysis of Negative Concord presented in this book, in par- ticular the essential distinction between that is drawn between negative spread and negative doubling. A final comment on the style of the book. Van der Wouden writes clearly, but at times certain details of the analysis are sometimes not spelled out explicitly and summaries of previous analyses are often rather (too) brief. I suspect that this is due to limitations of space. As it is, the book is already 300 pages long, and there is an inevitable trade-off between breadth of coverage and laying out all the details. Still, despite these minor expository drawbacks, the central ideas come across clearly and the book offers an important source on recent ways of thinking about negation. Any- one interested in the topic will undoubtedly appreciate it. References van der Wouden, Ton and Frans Zwarts, 1993. ‚A semantic analysis of negative concord™. In: Utpal Lahiri and Adam Wyner (eds.), SALT III: Proceeding of the Third Conference on Semantics and Linguistic Theory, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Department of Modem Languages and Linguis- tics, pp. 202-219. 