ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 409-447 A minimalist theory of A-movement and control* M. Rita Manziniﬂ, Anna Roussoub,* ™ Dipartimento di Lirquistica, Universitci di Firenze, Piazza Rrunelleschi, 50121 Firenze, Italy h Department of Foreign Languages and Literatures, University of Cyprus, P.O. Box 20537, IO60 Nicosia, Cyprus Received 19 May 1999; revised version 1 September 1999 Abstract In this article, we point out some problems in the theory of A-movement and control within Principles and Parameters models, and specifically within the minimalist approach of Chomsky (1995). In order to overcome these problems, we motivate a departure from the standard transformational theory of A-movement. In particular, we argue that DPs are merged in the position where they surface, and from there they attract (an aspectual feature of) a pred- icate. On this basis, control can simply be construed as the special case in which the same DP attracts more than one predicate. Arbitrary control reduces to the attraction of a predicate by an operator in C. We show that the basic locality properties of control follow from an appro- priate Scopal version of Chomsky™s (1995) minimal Link Condition and from Kayne™s (1984) Connectedness, phrased as conditions on the Attract operation. Our approach has con- siderable advantages in standard cases of A-movement as well, deriving the distribution of reconstruction effects at LF as well as the blocking effects on phonosyntactic rules at PF. 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. * Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the Conference on Syntactic Cafegories (Bangor, June 1996). the Girona Summer School in Linguistics (July 1996), the Research Seminar in York (Jan- uary 1997). UCLA (February 1997), GLOW 20 (Rabat, March 1997), Scuola Normale Superiore (Pisa, March 1997), Lezioni di Dottorato, Universita di Firenze e Sierra (April 1997), MIT and the University of Maryland (October 1997). We are grateful to the following people for comments and suggestions: Maya Arad, Elabbas Benmamoun, Bob Borsley, Misi Brody, Guglielmo Cinque, Annabel Cormack, Caterina Donati, Ken Hale, Ursel Luhde, Neil Smith, Bernadette Plunkett, Luigi Rizzi, Ian Roberts, Heloisa Salles, Leonardo Savoia, Dominique Sportiche, Tim Stowelt, Anna Szabolcsi, and George Tsoulas. Special thanks are due to Neil Smith, as one of the editors of this journal. The first circulated version of this article dates back to the summer of 1996; it was first enlarged with a view for publication in the summer of 1997, and then revised in the summer of 1998 bringing it up to date with Chomsky (1998), among other things. In its present form the article substantially reflects this last version. The original 1998 version appears in the UCL Working Papers in Linguistics, vol. I 1. * Co~esponding author. Phone: +357 2 758772; fax: +357 2 892325; E-mail: ann~ucy.ac.cy. Phone first author: +39 055 27.56804; E-mail: rmanzini@cesit 1 .unifi.it 03782166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00006- 1 410 M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409447 Keywords: A-movement; Arbitrary control; Attract; Connectedness Condition; Control, Copy; Minimal Link Condition; Trace. 1. Classical theories of A-movement and control and their problems According to Chomsky (198 1, 1982) the combination of fanaphoric, fpronominal features yields four different types of empty categories: A™-trace, A-trace, pro and PRO. PRO is identified with the +anaphoric, +pronominal empty category, which is subject to both Principles A and B of Binding Theory. If both of these apply to a given instance of PRO, a contradiction arises, since Principle A requires PRO to be bound locally, i.e. in its governing category, and Principle B requires it to be free in the same domain. Therefore PRO can only be found in positions for which the notion of governing category is not defined, i.e. in ungoverned positions. In this way, no contradiction arises under Binding Theory. This result is known as the PRO The- orem. Thus under Government and Binding (GB), the distribution of PRO is pre- dictable on the basis of independently motivated assumptions about empty categories and their binding properties. Within the framework of Chomsky (1995) the theory of empty categories just sketched is effectively abandoned. In particular, traces of A™-movement are con- strued as copies of the moved material, rather than as -anaphoric, -pronominal empty categories, i.e. R-expressions, as in the previous GB framework. Evidence from reconstruction phenomena provided by Chomsky (1995) favors this view. Sim- ilarly for Chomsky (1995), A-movement leaves traces that are copies, though we shall return shortly to the lack of evidence for reconstruction in these cases. Thus the classification of empty categories on the basis of fanaphoric, fpronominal features collapses. Independent developments in the theory also undermine the notion of gov- ernment, as well as the idea that there exists a Binding Theory module within the grammar. In particular, properties of lexical anaphors can be derived via movement, as argued by Pica (1987) and Reinhart and Reuland (1993), among others. Assum- ing that traces are copies nevertheless leaves pronominal empty categories, namely pro and PRO, to be accounted for. In the present paper we will leave pro and the parametrization issues it implies aside, and we will therefore concentrate on PRO; for a compatible theory of pro see Manzini and Savoia (in press). Chomsky and Lasnik (1995) seek to maintain the basic descriptive generalization according to which PRO is found only in the subject position of non-finite sentences. According to their analysis PRO is associated with a special type of Case, called null Case. Since null Case is deleted only by non-finite I, it follows that PRO is found only in the Spec of this latter category (see Martin, 1996 for an elaboration of this account). Furthermore, because null Case is like any other Case from the point of view of Move, we also derive that PRO behaves like a lexical argument under A- movement. Thus in (1) PRO is generated in the internal argument position of kill and raises to [Spec, to] to delete its (null) Case: (1) John tried [ PRO to be [killed P&0]] M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409d47 411 A standard set of predictions about the distribution of PRO that followed from the PRO Theorem of Chomsky (198 l), now follow from the stipulation of null Case. In particular PRO cannot be found in object position nor in the subject position of tensed sentences, as in (2)-(3) respectively: (2) *John persuaded PRO (3) *John believes that PRO will eat It seems to us that this approach has a number of problems. To begin with, null Case and PRO are only ever seen in connection with one another. In other words, there is no independent way of establishing the existence of either. Thus null Case does not appear to provide a genuine explanation for the distribution of PRO, but rather a way of stating the descriptive generalization concerning its distribution. This represents a step back with respect to the GB framework, where the distribution of PRO did indeed follow from the interaction of independently motivated assumptions even if their abandonment seems now more than justified. What is more, the minimalist approach to control inherits a number of problems from the GB analysis, not surprisingly since it essentially adapts it. In particular, as pointed out by Chomsky (1981) the distribution of PRO represents only one of the empirical facets of the theory of control. Even assuming that this can be accounted for in terms of null Case, the distribution of the antecedents of PRO, i.e. control proper, remains to be explained. The basic descriptive generalization concerning control, which appears to be accepted by Chomsky (1981), is Rosenbaum™s (1967) Minimal Distance Principle (MDP), according to which the rule of Equi-NP-Dele- tion, or the empty category that succeeds it, namely PRO, is controlled by the clos- est available antecedent, where ‚closest™ is defined in terms of c-command. Thus in (4), the matrix object, John, obligatorily controls PRO; in (5) the intermediate sub- ject, John, rather than the matrix one, does: (4) Mary [persuaded John [PRO to eat]] (5) Mary thinks that [John expected [PRO to eat]] A small class of English verbs, including promise, provide a counterexample to this generalization, as exemplified in (6), where the matrix subject rather than the matrix object controls PRO: (6) I promised John [PRO to eat] This potential problem may be solved, however, by an articulate approach to the internal argument structure of persuade-type and promise-type verbs, of the sort pro- posed for instance by Larson (1991). Within the GB framework of Chomsky (1981), there is no obvious way to reduce the MDP to some independently needed principle. Thus Manzini (1983) proposes a general re-systematization of control theory, whereby PRO is taken to be a pure anaphor and its distribution determined by the lack of Case, rather than by the PRO Theorem. As an anaphor PRO is then subjected to a ~~~i~bl~ nmdified) version of ~ri~~i~~~ A. This theory can predict locality effects of the type in f5), though it invokes pragmatics to explain the distribution of control within the argument struc- ture of the verb, as in (4) vs. (6). This latter assumption can however be dispensed with, given precisely the VP-shell conception of Larson (199 1) just referred to, As we have already mentioned, within the minimalist framework a number of authors in turn take anaphoric binding to reduce to Move, Therefore any attempt at reducing control to binding would appear to translate into a reduction of control directly to movement, This step appears to be attractive to the extent that the locality condition on control, the MDP, is based on exactly the same notion of closeness as the basic locality condition on movement, i.e. the ~i~?i~~ff~ Link ~~33~~~~~~ (MLC). However, such a radically minimafist approach to control theory is not exptored by Chomsky and Lasnik (19953. In recent years we know of at Least three different proposals that explicitly sub- sume control under movement. Martin <1996> maintains along with Chomsky and Lasnik (1995) the existence of a null Case-marked PRO which, nevertheless, is sub- ject to abstract movement exactly like a reflexive in the models of Pica (1987) and Reinhart and Reuland (1993) mentioned above, Q™Neil (1995) and Homstein (1999) subsume control under overt DP-movement; thus the controller is generated in the- matic position within the control sentence and then moves to its surface position through a higher thematic position. All of these theories radically differ from pro- posals, such as Bresnan‚s (1982), under which there is no syntactically represented subject at all for non-finite sentences, Bresnan ($982) goes on to argue that control mto non-finite sentences is the product of a lexical, rather than a syntactic, operation. This approach denies some of the basic tenets of Principles and Parameters theory, in which the lexicon reduces to a list of primitive terms, and all operations relating them are carried out by the syntax. The approach that we intend to take in turn differs from all the above, involving first a departure from the standard transformational theory of A-movement. We therefore turn to A-movement next. Proposing that a DP can move through two thematic positions before reaching its Case position, as Homstein (1999) does, amounts to a violation of the well-known generalization of Chomsky (1981) whereby movement is never to a theta-position. As Homstein (1997) carefully explains, this generalization is based on the GB con- cept of D-structure, whose elimination represents one of the quahfying features of m~nimaIism. Thus by de~n~t~on D-structure satisfies the Theta-Criterion before movement. This requires each theta-positron to be filled by an argument at the point of Merge; this in turn forces the postulation of PRO for the cases where fexical argu- ments are not available. Once the notion of D-structure is abandoned, this funda- mental piece of theoretical justification for PRO becomes lost. To be more precise, Chomsky (1995) holds on to the idea that there is a one-to- one match between arguments and theta-positions, but does so through an extra assumption, While properties of lexical items are in general lexical features, thet.a- roles are to be construed differently, namely as the by-product of a configurational relation between a head and its spec~~er/complement. This confi~~tio~al theory of M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409-447 413 theta-roles has the effect of barring movement to a theta-position exactly as Chom- sky™s (198 1) Theta-criterion at D-structure does. But as Homstein (1997) also points out, if theta-roles are instead construed as features, the null assumption under mini- malist theory, then nothing prevents them from acting as attractors for arguments already merged; this in turn opens the way for an overt movement theory of control. What Homstein (1997) fails to notice is that these same conclusions have implica- tions that go far beyond control. It is these implications that interest us here.™ If arguments and theta-roles need not be matched at the point of merger, it becomes possible to assume that arguments are generated not in thematic position but directly in the position where they surface, provided suitable means can be found to connect them to their theta-roles. If theta-roles are indeed features, the simplest such means suggested by the minimalist theory of Chomsky (1995) is Move-F. To illustrate these points, let us consider the simple sentence in (7). In Chomsky™s (1995) terms, this is associated with a derivational stage of the type in (8a), irrele- vant details omitted; by movement of the VP-internal subject to [Spec, I] the final string in (8b) is obtained: (7) John called. (8) a. [vp John called] b. [,r John I [vr J&+called]] In the alternative terms that we are suggesting here, the derivation of (7) would take a form much more similar to (9). In (9) the subject is merged directly in [Spec, I]. A theta-feature, notated provisionally as 8, is moved from V to the IP domain, establishing the relevant thematic interpretation for the subject: (9) [Ip John B-I [vPcalled(8)J1 A number of problems are raised by the derivation in (9) but before considering them, we wish to establish the main empirical reasons that favor the covert move- ment approach in (9) over the overt movement approach in (S).* ™ The work of Homstein (1998, 1999) including in particular his theory of control has been the object of an article by Brody (1999). who notes that the present work (1998 version) shares with Homstein™s work ‚some™ of the problems raised (Brody, 1999: note 13). Brody (1999) presents two main objections to Homstein™s theory of control. The first one is based on Homstein™s reliance on pro for cases of arbi- trary control; as we shall see at length (section 4) our theory crucially differs from Homstein™s on this point. The second objection is related to how to derive differences between raising and control, and is indeed potentially problematic for our theory as well; we shall return to this objection below in foot- note 4. * The idea that John is merged directly in the position where it surfaces shares with Cormack and Smith (1997, 1999) some important intuitions, in particular that ﬁthe PF-interpretable part of a head is merged in the position in which it is PF-interpretedﬂ (Cormack and Smith, 1999: 201). It is less clear to which extent the present theory shares the idea of Cormack and Smith (1999: 201) that ﬁthe LF-inter- pretable part of a head is merged in the position in which it is LF-interpretedﬂ. This is mainly due to the fact that Cormack and Smith (1999) explicitly conceive of a lexical entry as including both ‚PF- and LF-parts™. It is implicit in our discussion on the contrary that only what Cormack and Smith (1999) 414 M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409447 It is fairly obvious that no considerations pertaining to the operation of movement itself can distinguish the analyses in (8) and (9), since the same constraints operate both on phrasal and F-movement. The only difference between (8) and (9) concerns therefore the nature of the copy, or trace, left behind by the application of move- ment, which is fully phrasal in (8) and a mere feature in (9). On this basis, the pre- dictions of the DP-movement and the F-movement models differ empirically with respect to reconstruction. Remember that since movement is Copy and Merge, DP- movement to [Spec, I] leaves behind a full copy of the DP in thematic position, exactly like w/z-movement to [Spec, C] leaves behind a full copy of the w/r-phrase. In the case of w/r-movement this copying of phrasal material has been empirically justified by Chomsky (1995) on the basis that it gives rise to reconstruction effects. Thus in a sentence of the type in (10) the anaphor himself can be interpreted as bound either by John or Bill: (10) John wonders [which pictures of himself [Bill saw e 11 Under reasonable assumptions about anaphoric binding, the reading under which himself is anaphoric to John corresponds to the construal of the wh-phrase in its derived position; the reading under which himself is anaphoric to Bill corresponds to the construal of the wh-phrase in the ‚trace™ position. Chomsky (1995) himself argues, on the other hand, that DP-movement never gives rise to reconstruction. He accounts for this by assuming that reconstruction is a by-product of the Operator-Variable interpretation at LF. Thus consider a sentence of the type in (11) under the standard DP-movement derivation: call the ‚PF-part™ constitutes a (language-specific) lexical entry; there is no ‚LF-part™ but simply features and categories of Universal Grammar (see Roberts and Roussou, 1997). Where the present approach and Cormack and Smith™s (1999) again coincide is with respect to the operation insuring that the proper rela- tion holds ﬁbetween each LF category and the related . . . PF categoryﬂ (Cormack and Smith, 1999: 201). Cormack and Smith (1999) refer to this as ‚checking under minimality™. It is obvious however that their ‚checking™ crucially abandons matching and deletion of features; thus what is left of Chomsky™s (1995) original checking is just what Chomsky (1998) calls Agree and we call Attract (for our explicit defini- tion of Attract, see section 2). The idea that minimality, i.e. locality, constraints operate at a distance is a further logical consequence of this stance, shared therefore by the present article and by Cormack and Smith (1999) once again. Brody (1999: note 13) sees the present paper as a ‚different execution™ of Brody™s (1997) ‚FF A- chains™. However, contrary to what Brody (1997, 1999) seems to have in mind, our feature movement does not involve the presence of a feature copy of the higher argument in the lower theta-position; it just involves copies of theta-roles, construed as properties of predicates. Thus our feature copies (to be aban- doned in section 2 below) imply lower full lexical items exactly as in Chomsky (1995); the crucial inno- vation of Brody (1997) that ﬁfeature copies and full copies can be inserted in the structure in any c-com- mand orderﬂ (Brody, 1997: 166) does not (and never did) apply to the present theory. The only possible like between the present theory and Brody™s (1997) is that the notion of feature chain finds a potentially much wider application than in Chomsky (1995); but this link is too tenuous to qualify the present the- ory as an ‚execution™ of Brody™s (1997). This point is particularly relevant to the extent that Brody (1997, 1999) seeks to advance ideas, related to the representations vs. derivations debate, which are com- pletely independent of the proposals contained in this article. M.R. ~unzin~, A. Roussou I LingIta I IO (2000) 409-447 415 (11) *Each other seem to them [e&+&her to work] The ungrammati~ality of (11) requires that the conditions concerning anaphoric bind- ing are computed with respect to the derived position of each other. If each other could reconstruct, then we would expect them to be able to bind it, giving rise to a well-formed reading. Crucially, our approach to raising and in general to A-move- ment predicts data of the type in (1 I) without need for any additional stipulation about reconstruction. Indeed the derivation of (I 1) takes the alternative form in (12): (12) *Each other [Q-I seem to them [ to [work (@)]]I In (12) each other is merged directly into the [Spec, I] position in which it surfaces, and the only movement that takes place is that of 0 to its local domain. Therefore we do not expect any effects connected with the reconstruction of each other to its O- position. We shall return to potential counterexamples in section 6. The other fundamental argument in favor of the F-movement approach over the DP- movement one is represented by the contrast between the behavior of A™-movement traces and A-movement traces with respect to syntactically conditioned phonological rules. While the reconstruction test in (lo)-( 11) shows that the presumed DP-copy plays no role at LF, and therefore is best abandoned at this interface level, the phonosyntactic rule test addresses the relevance of the presumed DP-copy at the other interface level, i.e. PF. As is well known, a number of scholars have argued that A- movement traces, as opposed to A™-movement ones, do not block PF processes. Not surprisingly some of them, notably Postal and Pullum (1982), have concluded from this that DP-traces do not exist. However, the non-existence of DP-traces does not imply the absence of A-movement. We effectively agree that DP-traces do not exist; but A- movement does exist within the theory being proposed in the form of F-movement. The blocking of phonosyntactic rules such as wanna contraction represents a clas- sical argument in favor of the ‚reality™ of A™-movement traces. As the argument goes, the sentence in (13) has two possible interpretations, corresponding to the two structures in (14). In (14a) the trace of w&movement is interpreted as occupying the object position of the embedded sentence; in (14b) it is interpreted as occupying the embedded subject position: (13) Who do you want to call? (14) a. [who do you want [PRO to call wke]] b. [who do you want [+&e-to call}] If want to is contracted to wama, as indicated in (1.5), the two interpretations reduce to just one, namely (14a); (14b) is blocked under contraction: (15) Who do you wanna call? A possible analysis of these data is that the phonological process responsible for the contraction of want to to wama is sensitive to the presence of lexical material 416 M.R. Manzini. A. Roussou i Linguu 110 (20001409-447 between the two in the shape of a w/z-trace; hence it cannot apply in (14b). If so, a natural explanation for the lack of blocking effects in (14a) is that PRO, or whatever else PRO reduces to, is not lexical. Consider then A-traces, as seen for instance in (16). We take it that in (16) have to does not define a control environment, i.e. one involving a theta-role both in the matrix and in the embedded clause, but rather a raising environment: (16) a. I have to leave b. I hafta leave The lack of blocking effects in (16b) argues that what is traditionally construed as a DP-trace, as in (17a), is better construed as an F-trace, as proposed by the present theory and illustrated in (l™i™b). Indeed (17b) suggests an immediate explanation as to why there are no blocking effects on contraction, namely that F-traces do not count as lexical, while (17a) is prima facie identical to (14b); we will return to these points shortly : (17) a. [I have [I to leave]] b. [I O-have [to leave (@)]I There also appear to be conceptual reasons that favor the F-movement construal over the phrasal construal of A-movement. To begin with, the mechanism illustrated for sentence-internal raising in (9) extends to long-distance raising across sentence boundaries of the type illustrated in (18): (18) John 0-I [seems [ to work (@>]I In (1 S), the &role associated with the embedded verb work moves in one step to the local domain of the DP John which is merged directly in the [Spec, I] position where it surfaces. From this construal of raising, in which the embedded [Spec, I] is not involved, we derive a first significant consequence for the grammar in general. The embedded subject position in raising contexts is the only one where according to Chomsky (1995), a D-feature can be seen independently of Case. Indeed in Chom- sky™s (1995) analysis the Extended Projection Principle (EPP) requires the presence of a D-feature on the infinitival I, which forces a DP to pass through its Spec, as in the derivation outlined in (19). At the same time, the fact that the DP can and must move on to the matrix [Spec, I] is due to the impossibility of the infinitival 1 delet- ing its Case: (19) John I [seems [3&n to [3&n work]]] The analysis in (18) proposed here crucially differs from the analysis in (19), in that it does not imply movement through the Spec of the infinitival I, not even limited to the @feature. This means that within the present theory we dispense with any D-feature associated with a non-finite I (see also Castillo et al., 1999 for independent argu- merits).. There is therefore no position within the present theory where the D-feature and the Case feature can be seen independently of one another. Thus the two features can be unified, eliminating the considerable redundancy between them in the gram- mar. We should also stress that according to Chomsky (1993, Case is the only feature which is non-interpretable on both the attractor and the attractee, casting doubts on its existence independently of the redundancy just noted (Roberts and Roussou, 1997; Chomsky, 1998). See Manzini and Savoia (in press) and Roberts and Roussou (in press) for alternative theories of the EPP compatible with the analysis proposed here. To summarize, there is no evidence either at the LF or at the PF interface that Copy and Merge of lexical material, i.e. classical phrasal movement, is involved in A-movement contexts. This therefore seems to suggest that lexical arguments are generated directly in the position where they surface and an appropriate operation connects them to a theta-feature associated with the predicate. The appropriate oper- ation would be Move-F in Chomsky™s (1995) framework. In the following section we will, however, propose that there are conceptual and empirical reasons that favor an even more radical approach to A-movement. 2. The theory of A-movement So far, we have simply suggested a refo~ulation of A-movement from Copy and Merge of a whole DP, i.e. DP-movement, to Copy and Merge of a single feature, i.e. F-movement. We have argued for this alternative on the basis of two sets of empiri- cal arguments, namely the lack of reconstruction effects at LF and of blocking effects on phonosyntactic rules at PF. In the first case it is obvious that in the absence of a lexical copy we should not expect reconstruction effects. However, in the second case, one could argue that we should be able to detect some effects of the copy of the feature, since F-movement is Copy and Merge after all. In other words, the fact that there is an asymmetry between lexical copies and feature copies at PF has to be stip- ulated. This suggests to us that F-movement does not involve Copy and Merge of any sort and is not therefore movement in the sense defined by Chomsky (1995). In the light of these considerations let us go back to the derivation in (9). Let us assume in the te~inology of Chomsky (1995) that John has some feature that needs to be checked by called and specifically by its theta-feature. If John and called were in the same local domain, i.e. in practice in a Spec-head configuration, then check- ing could take place directly. The intervention of movement, if only of a feature as in (9), is due to the fact that John and called are not in the same local domain. Sup- pose, on the contrary, we give up the notion of local domain; then whatever opera- tion needs to take place between John and called can do so directly, as tentatively indicated in (20) by means of the italics: (20) [lp John I [vp called(@)]] Chomsky (I 998) explicitly recognizes the stipulative nature of the loca~checking domain. Indeed he construes movement, which applies to phrases and not to fea- 418 M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409447 tures, as a separate operation from Agree, which applies to features. Thus the opera- tion in (20) is a counterpart of the operation Agree in Chomsky™s (1998) system; contrary to his analysis we want to suggest that movement is to be dispensed with altogether. For present purposes we shall simply adopt the name Attract for the oper- ation in (20). Agree as defined by Chomsky (1998) still involves the deletion of (non-interpretable) features of one lexical item (the probe) by another (the goal). The operation in (20), on the other hand, is conceived as preserving the integrity of both lexical items; the reasons for this lie in feature theory, a topic to which we shall return shortly. Although we agree with Chomsky (1998) that the notion of local/checking domain has no theory-independent motivation, in Chomsky™s (1995) system there is one more locality condition, namely the MLC, which is defined for the rule of move- ment itself. The MLC has very clear empirical consequences, namely the minimality effects discussed by Rizzi (1990) and Chomsky (1995). In order to capture these effects within our framework, we propose that the MLC applies to the operation Attract. The original formulation of the MLC of Chomsky (1995) is based on the intervention of potential attractees. In other words, movement of attractee c1 to attrac- tor y is blocked if there is an attractee l3 that is closer to y. This condition is repro- duced in (21) referred now to Attract: (21) MLC y attracts c1 only if there is no l3, l3 closer to y than a, such that y attracts 0. (21) is trivially satisfied in (20), by John and 0, since there is no other candidate theta-role and DP argument in the sentence. In the next section, we will motivate a modification of the MLC, which will allow us to deal in a simple and elegant man- ner with more complex cases, including control. What matters to us at this point, however, is simply to establish the general feasibility of our approach. While the MLC takes care of what Cinque (199 1) calls weak islands, another con- dition on movement is needed to account for strong islands. We take it that the best theoretical account of the empirical data is provided by Kayne™s (1984) Connected- neSS Condition. In accordance with our formulation of the MLC in (21), we take Connectedness to hold directly of Attract as well. In (22) we maintain Kayne™s (1984) term of g-projection, though the relevant notion is defined with reference only to complementation, rather than government, as shown in (22b). Furthermore, although Kayne (1984) postulates a directional asymmetry, we do not, in line with later proposals by Bennis and Hoekstra (1984) and Longobardi (1984). See also Manzini (1998) for a discussion of how the notion of g-projection could actually be subsumed under a reformulation of Merge: (22) Connectedness Condition a. Let l3 attract a. Then p together with a and the g-projections of a must form a connected subtree. b. y is a g-projection of a if it is a projection of a, or a projection of some 6 such that a g-projection of a is a complement of 6. M.R. Munzini. A. Roussou I Lingua II0 (2000) 409447 419 In the case of (20) the condition in (22) is satisfied by John and 8. Indeed the g-pro- jection set of V includes VP and IP. John in [Spec, I], V and the g-projections of V, namely VP and IP, form a connected subtree, in this case the whole sentential tree. We can now consider questions, carefully skirted so far, concerning the nature of the feature theory that underlies the attraction of theta-roles by DP arguments. First, we need to specify exactly what kind of feature 8 is. Second, we need to specify which feature of the DP argument attracts 8. Third, we need to specify what the properties of Attract are with respect to notions such as strength and interpretability introduced by Chomsky™s (1995) grammar. We shall then be able to trace our steps backward to a resolution first of the control problem and then a number of residual problems concerning A-movement itself. Consider first the role played by such general notions as Chomsky™s (1995) inter- pretability and strength in the present theory. Remember that according to Chomsky (1995) there are essentially two cases in which a feature attracts another feature. The first case arises when the attractor is strong; in this case attraction is overt and inde- pendent of the other properties of the features involved, in particular their inter- pretability. The other case in which a feature acts as an attractor, independently of its strength, is when it is non-interpretable; in this case another feature moves to delete it, even if only abstractly. Chomsky (1998) criticizes the notion of strength on grounds of its conceptual complexity, since it is construed as a feature of a feature. This, however, is not to say that strength does not have empirical relevance. Following Roberts and Roussou (1997), we assume that strength is in fact to be understood as an instruction to lexi- calize a certain feature. Since lexicalization is typically done by Merge within the present framework, the issue of strength is largely irrelevant for Attract. For instance, in (20) we take it that I is associated with a D-feature that needs to be lex- icalized; in a non-null subject language like English the lexicalization is accom- plished by merging a full DP, John in (20) in [Spec, I]. The issue of interpretability, on the other hand, requires more discussion. It seems to us that maintaining Chomsky™s (1995, 1998) theory of interpretability within the present framework amounts to nothing more than a terminological gimmick. Thus we could associate every D with a non-interpretable O-feature, which would attract an interpretable 8 feature associated with V; but it is certainly simpler to maintain that every D directly attracts 8. The intermediate step of postulating a non-inter- pretable 8 feature is entirely ad hoc. In turn, if D directly attracts 0, this amounts to saying that this operation is well defined between two interpretable features. This conclusion, and in fact the stronger conclusion that all features in the grammar are interpretable, has been independently proposed in the literature, notably by Brody (1997) Roberts and Roussou (1997) and we shall accept it here without further dis- cussion. If so, Attract not only can, but also must involve interpretable features, Summarizing so far, in a simple sentence of the type in (20) the interpretable D feature of John attracts the interpretable O-feature of V. The basic import of the oper- ation Attract is the formation of an ordered pair of elements, in the case at hand (John, ). Thus the rather intuitive notation in (20) could be made more explicit as in (20™). The application of the operation Attract at the John cycle adds to the tree-the- 420 M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409447 oretical object formed by Merge, namely (20a™), a further object represented by the ordered pair of elements John and , namely (20b™): (20™) a. [ip John I [vPcalled(8)]] b. (John, (3) In effect, the object in (20b™) is what remains of a classical chain; this is essentially what Manzini (1998) refers to as a dependency. As we already saw, the basic local- ity principles, i.e. the MLC and Connectedness, are directly defined for the operation Attract and obviously satisfied in (20)-(20™). Before considering more complex cases than (20) and eventually control, we need to go back to the question of what the nature of the Q-feature is. More specifically, we can ask whether the present theory of A-movement really chooses between the feature-based theory of theta structure that we have adhered to so far and the con- figurational view advocated by Chomsky (1995). As it turns out, Attract, contrary to F-movement, does not really choose between these two options. Hale and Keyser (1993) argue compellingly that the notion of theta-role is deeply flawed. In particular, it is easy to show that it is not restrictive enough, since there is no principled reason why the basic repertory of Agent, Theme, Source, Goal, etc. should not be further expanded; nor is there any reason why two or more of those specifications could not be combined; and so on. Faced with these problems, Hale and Keyser (1993), followed by Chomsky (1995) among others, propose that theta- roles should be replaced by elementary predicate-argument configurations within a VP-shell. Thus instead of (20), where V is associated with a feature 0, we have a structure like (23) where it is the presence of a single VP layer that indicates the nature of Theme of the one argument: (23) LIP John I [VP kftll The italics in (23) indicate that the operation Attract ought to proceed as before. Indeed the theory of Attract that we have now defined does not require the two fea- tures involved in this operation to have any special properties in relation to one another. Therefore there is no reason why the operation Attract could not be defined directly between D and V. In this way, we reconstruct the basic intuition of the con- figurational theory of theta-roles, namely that they correspond to a relation directly defined between an argument and a predicate. At the same time, it becomes unlikely, if not impossible, that the attraction of V by D should involve merger of V under D, as under Chomsky™s (1998) attract. Hence we confirm our conception of Attract as maintaining the lexical integrity of the items involved. The analysis in (23) can also be extended to predicates with two or more argu- ments. In the pure VP-shell notation employed by Hale and Keyser (1993) a lower V represents the basic predicate of the sentence, and a higher V represents an abstract causative predicate in eventive verbs. In the rather more articulated concep- tion of the VP-shell drawn by Chomsky (1995), the higher V corresponds to the light verb v, as in (24): M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409447 421 (24) [V [VII Suppose we adopt the structure in (24). Sentences which embed (24) such as (25) raise the problem of the derivation associated with the object, since so far only derivations associated with a subject have been considered: (25) John killed Mary. The peculiar problem posed by (25) under Attract is that if Mary is generated within the lower VP, then it would mean that arguments can be generated in thematic posi- tions after all. But if we want to maintain that the subject, John in (25), is not gener- ated in a thematic position, then we need a general conception of predicate properties as ‚weak™, or in present terms not lexicalized. The alternative therefore would be for Mary to be generated in [Spec, v]; but this is even more problematic, since in this case it is not clear why Mary would attract the lower V rather than v itself, under the MLC. We believe in fact that this set of problems is an artifact of Chomsky™s (1995) conception of v, depending in turn on his device of multiple Spec™s. Suppose that in line with a number of theorists, notably Kayne (1994) we enforce a single Spec con- straint for each head. Then we are forced to attribute the two properties of v in Chomsky™s (1995) system to two different heads. On the one hand we can postulate a head, v proper, associated with a D-feature; accusative case will be a morphologi- cal reflex of the lexicalization of this feature (see Manzini and Savoia, 1998 for a precise realization of this general idea). On the other hand, a higher V head will be typically associated with the CAUSE predicate and its relation to the DP in [Spec, I] will correctly establish the argument interpretation of the latter. In other words, a transitive sentence like (25) will have the structure in (26): (26) [John I [V [Mary v [VI]]. Needless to say, the correct word order for (26) in English requires that the verb killed be in the highest V. Arguments for this are also independently found in the lit- erature (cf. Bobaljik™s, 1995 discussion of his Stacking Hypothesis). Before concluding on this point, we would like to note that the conception of argument structure of Hale and Keyser (1993) and Chomsky (1995), while not nec- essarily having recourse to abstract predicates, owes an important debt to lexical decomposition frameworks. In essence the number of argument positions and their properties are restricted by the number of primitive predicate types and their possi- ble combinations. An alternative theory based on the idea that argument structure is aspectually characterized is argued for by Tenny (1994) Borer (1994), Salles (1997) and Arad (1998); Manzini and Savoia (1998) go as far as denying the existence of VP-shells, given that theta-roles are subsumed under aspectual features. We believe that this approach avoids the problems associated not only with standard theta-roles but also with lexical decomposition and is therefore to be preferred. The relevant lines of empirical argument, however, cannot be pursued here; we shall therefore be satisfied with (26) for the purposes of this article. 422 M.R. Manzini, A. Roussolr J Lingua I IO (2000) 409447 In what follows we will provide empirical and conceptual arguments in addition to those already presented in favor of our view of ‚A-movement™. The first set of arguments comes from the domain of control. We have independently argued that the classical analysis of control, by means of the empty category PRO, has concep- tual and empirical drawbacks, which surface in different forms within the GB and minimalist frameworks. Within the present framework we will show that all of these difficulties can be overcome. 3. The theory of control The major proposal that we will put forward in this section is that within the framework of assumptions laid out in section 2, control corresponds to a derivation in which one argument DP attracts two (or more) different predicates. We shall argue that this model allows for an elegant account of control which overcomes many of the problems noted for previous frameworks in section 1. Consider the basic control sentence in (27): (27) [,r John I Lvp tried lip to [VP ~e~vellll In (27) ~~~~ is directly merged into [Spec, I] position to lexicahze the D-feature of I. In order to achieve the desired control interpretation, it must be the case that the DP attracts both the matrix V and the embedded V. Under the MLC in (21), the DP is clearly allowed to attract the higher V since this is the closest attractee. We may wonder, on the other hand, what allows DP to attract the lower V as well. Remem- ber that under Chomsky™s (1995) MLC, once movement of a given feature or phrase occurs, its trace ceases to be visible for the purposes of the MLC, allowing for move- ment of a lower feature or phrase of the same type to take place. Technically, all that is needed in the present framework is an adaptation of this convention under which a DP can attract a V across another V, as long as the latter is itself attracted by the same DP. It seems to us, however, that this technical solution comes short of a real answer to our problem. One conclusion that can be drawn from the difficulty just noted is that contrary to what the MLC states, potential attractees do not really interact with one another. Rather it is potential attractors that interact, as independently suggested by Manzini (1997). Adapting slightly the formulation in Manzini (1997), we therefore define the MLC in scopal terms, as in (28): (28) Scopal MLC Feature F attracts feature FA only down to the next F™ that also attracts F,. Given the Scopal MLC the argument DP in (27) automatically attracts all of the Vs that it has in its scope, where its scope extends as far down in the tree as the next DP. Since there is no other DP than John present in (27). the scope of John includes both the matrix and the embedded predicate, as desired. M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409-447 423 Remember that Chomsky (1995) unifies Lust Resort and the MLC into a single principle. In (29) we provide our version of the &opal Last Resort + MLC. Effec- tively, (29) represents a strengthening of (28) to a biconditional. Quite simply, our proposal is that Last Resort also functions as a Scopal Last Resort principle which requires (and therefore allows) a given attractor to attract all of the potential attractees down to the domain of the next attractor: (29) &opal Last Resort + MLC F attracts all and only the F,‚s that are in its scope. It is worth noticing that the attraction of V by DP within the present framework provides a natural translation of Chomsky™s (1981) Theta-Criterion, whereby every argument must be assigned a theta-role and every theta-role must be assigned to an argument. Chomsky (1995) enforces the satisfaction of both of these clauses by his configurational definition of argument structure. The condition in (29) derives the same results as the Theta-Criterion, when applied to arguments and predicates, since it effectively requires that every DP be matched with all and only the predicates in its immediate scope. In recalling the Theta-Criterion we slightly weakened it by omitting the one-to-one correspondence between arguments and theta-roles present in the original formulation. By hypothesis this requirement does not hold under the present construal of control. To be more precise, every theta-role/predicate is associ- ated with a single DP, but vice versa, a single DP can be associated with more than one theta-role/predicate. In fact, there is independent evidence from secondary pred- ication for this weakening of the theory, as explicitly recognized by Chomsky (1986). We are now in a position to consider whether the present theory derives the first empirical generalization on control reviewed in section 1, namely Chomsky ‚s (198 1) PRO Theorem. The relevant data are in (2)-(3). Within the framework of assump- tions adopted here their relevant structure is as in (30)-(31) respectively: (30) [Ip John I Lvp persuaded ]ﬁp v [~pVllll (31) [Ip John I [vp believes Lcp that LIP will [VP eat]l]ll Consider (31) first. John cannot be merged directly into the matrix [Spec, I] position, because this implies a violation of the requirement imposed by the strong D-feature of the embedded I represented by will. Suppose then John is merged in the embed- ded [Spec, I] position. In the framework of Chomsky (1995) its movement into the matrix [Spec, I] position is straightforwardly blocked by the fact that its (non-inter- pretable) Case feature has already been deleted and cannot therefore delete the Case feature of matrix I. In section 2, however, we suggested that Case features do not have any syntactic import and should be subsumed under D-features. This means that we must find some alternative means to rule out movement from the lower to the higher [Spec, I] in (31). The generalization that prohibits movement from one Case position to another can be reconstructed within the present framework as a pro- hibition against the same D(P) lexicalizing more than one D-feature. 424 M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409447 If we extend the constraint we just formulated so that any lexical element is allowed to lexicalize one and only one feature, we expect not to be able to copy it at all. This result is partly undesirable to the extent that we want to maintain a Copy and Merge derivation for the w/z-movement cases. One possibility is that the reconstruction effects that argue in favor of this derivation according to Chomsky (1995) are themselves to be explained in some alternative way.™ For pre- sent purposes, however, it is sufficient to adopt an intermediate generalization, whereby any given lexical item can lexicalize the same feature once and only once. This still allows for w&movement, in that the w&phrase lexicalizes a D-feature at the position of merger and a different feature, namely w/z/Q, in the position it moves to. (30) is blocked in much the same way as (31). Remember that we take v to be associated with a D-feature that needs to be lexicalized. If John is inserted in [Spec, v], it cannot be raised to [Spec, I] to lexicalize the D-feature of I, because it has already lexicalized another D-feature. If it is inserted directly in [Spec, I], then the D-feature associated with v is not lexicalized at all. In fact, with respect to the dis- tribution of PRO our results are not so much reminiscent of Chomsky™s (198 1) PRO Theorem, as of the alternative generalization of Manzini (1983), according to which the distribution of PRO is dictated by its lack of Case. Another generalization that remains to be accounted for is that expressed by the MDP, as illustrated in (4)-(5) in section 1. The relevant structure of (5) is as in (32): (32) [Ip Mary I [vr thinks that [tp John I ivP expected [IP to [VP edlllll Notice that in (32) Mal-y lexicalizes the D-feature of the matrix I and John lexical- izes the D-feature of the intermediate I, as required; by hypothesis, non-finite I does not have a D-feature. In order to capture the MDP, we need to establish the conclu- sion that the most embedded predicate eat is attracted by John, as indicated by the italics, and not by Mary. Under the Scopal MLC, Mary attracts only down to the scope of the next attractor, i.e. John. Therefore eat is not a possible attractee of Mary. The only possibility that the Scopal MLC allows for is the correct one, whereby thinks is attracted by Mary and the other predicates by John. Classical MDP examples of the type in (4), with the structure indicated in (33), are accounted for much in the same way as (32): (33) [,p Mary I [vr persuaded lyp John v [VP V LIP to [VP e4llllll If we take v to represent a D-position, lexicalized by John, then the lower Vs cannot be associated with Mary across it, under the Scopal MLC, as desired. Remember that a separate Attract operation connects Mary to the higher V position in the matrix VP-shell. ‚( On reconstruction in general see the discussion in section 6 below. The relevant alternative could be that the anaphors in examples such as (lo), being inside picture-NPs, are in fact logophors. M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409-447 42s Within the present theory, control and raising differ only by the nature of the predicates involved.4 This holds for subject control and raising to subject as well as for object control and raising to object, or Exceptional Case Marking (ECM). As argued by Johnson (199 1) and Chomsky (1995), the overt realization of Mary as the subject of the ECM infinitival in (34) below depends on the presence of what for them is a Case position and for us a D-position in the VP-shell of believe. In present 4 In addressing Hornstein™s (1998, 1999) theory, Brody (1999) raises some problems which are poten- tially relevant here. The first one has to do with the impossibility of predicting any complementary dis- tribution between raising and control, since there are no two distinct objects such as trace and PRO. The answer is already provided in the text; whether a derivation is called raising or control depends entirely on the lexical properties of the predicates involved. The second argument deployed by Brody (1999) has to do with the impossibility of blocking an empty category in the object position of transitive verbs (PRO in classical terms) as opposed to an empty category in the object position of unaccusative verbs (trace in classical terms). Consider (i): (i) *John hit As it turns out, it is the essence of both Homstein™s theory and the present one that a derivation whereby the same argument, say John, comes to be associated with two theta-roles is allowed by the grammar. Homstein (1999), in discussing the problem, proposes a Case-theoretical solution, essentially that move- ment cannot occur from a Case position. This in turn leads to the equally well-known counterargument that it should then be possible to have a sentence like (ii) in which HIT does assign two theta-roles but no Case; if not, the problem becomes simply explaining why verbs like HIT are in fact not found in the grammar: (ii) John HIT Interestingly, Homstein (1999) does individuate verbs which have the properties of HIT, for instance behave in (iii): (iii) John behaved What amounts to a discussion of this problem can also be found in recent work by Manzini and Savoia (1998, 1999, forthcoming) which is compatible with the present article, while being independent of it. Manzini and Savoia argue that in so-called accusative languages accusative spells out the Measure (or patient) of the event. Consider then structures (passives, middles/reflexives, unaccusatives) which involve a Measure (or patient) and no accusative spell-out. Manzini and Savoia propose that these are the result of the basic process responsible for control here, i.e. the attraction of two aspectual (or theta-) roles by a single argument. This operation can (but need not) be reflected by the appearence of specialized morphology, such as the clitic s(i) in Italian dialects (Manzini and Savoia, forthcoming), the clitic u and/or middle morphology on the verb in Albanian dialects (Manzini and Savoia, 1999). In the perspec- tive just sketched, nothing rules out (i), since Case-theoretical reasons do not apply, making (ii) also irrelevant. As expected, the counterpart of (i) is in fact perfectly grammatical in Italian, provided si is associated with the verb, as in (iv); this example can be read indifferently as a passive or as a reflexive: (iv) Gianni si picchia John si hits This leaves the ungrammaticality of (i) as a fairly uninteresting problem specific to English (and hence to its lexicon, under a lexical theory of parametrization). Homstein (1999) also has the intuition that the control-type analysis that he imputes to sentences like (iii) extends to reflexive sentences, but as Brody (1999) correctly notices he does not explain how the difficulties of this approach are dealt with. If Manzini and Savoia are correct, dealing with these difficulties implies a more radical departure from the theory of Chomsky (1981) than envisaged by Homstein (1999). Note that so far we have only said that accusative lexicalizes a Measure (or patient) argument; we have not mentioned that it can also replace the nominative as the lexicalization of an Origin (or Agent), giving rise to so-called ECM in English and similar phenomena in other languages. Indeed the theory of Manzini and Savoia does not provide an account for this range of phenomena; but as far as we can see they are not directly incompatible with anything we have assumed. 426 h4.R. ~a~zzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409-&7 terms, this D-position requires lexicalization by a DP, which in turn attracts the pred- icates in its immediate scope, as indicated in (35). Remember once again that John triggers a separate instance of Attract, involving the higher VP-shell predicate. The effect is that of raising to object because of the nature of the predicates involved (as expressed for instance by Chomsky™s, 1975 [ 19551 idea that believe forms a complex predicate with the embedded verb): (34) John believes Mary to eat too much. (35) John I [believes [Mar-y v [V [to [eat too much]]]]] It is often assumed in the literature that contexts of obligatory control, such as the ones that we are considering, do not admit of split antecedents (cf. Lebeaux, 1985, Homstein, 1999). In this respect, the Scopal MLC yields the conventionally accepted results, since the embedded predicate in (36) is in the attraction scope of Mary but not of John: (36) John persuaded Mary to drink. Transitive control predicates such as persuade also raise the question of the inter- action between control and classical A-movement, such as passive, Consider (37): (37) John was persuaded to eat Our theory predicts that the embedded and the matrix Vs are both attracted by John only if there is no intermediate D-position in the sentence skeleton. Thus contra Baker et al. (1989), we are led to the conclusion that in short passives only one D is synta~ticalIy represented. This analysis has another consequence that turns out to be correct. It is often noticed in the literature (Williams, 1980) that subject control verbs such as promise do not passivize, or to the extent that they passivize they require control by the derived subject, such as John in (38): (38) John was promised to be hired. Within our theory, the well-formedness of (38) with an ‚object™ control, rather than a ‚subject™ control reading, corresponds to a derivation whereby hired and promise are both attracted by John. As desired, this is the only derivation allowed by the theory. Summing up so far, if what precedes is correct, the ~c~p~~ MLC yields the two basic properties of control, namely the PRO Theorem and the MDP, without need for extra stipulations in the grammar. In particular, within the present theory there is no need to state the MDP as a separate locality principle; nor to capture the distribution of control by using a specialized empty category PRO and/or the ad hoc notion of null Case. Other properties of control remain nevertheless to be taken into account, notably arbitrary control. Before we go on to arbitrary control, it is worth pausing to note M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409-447 427 that the idea that there is no A-movement, and that the syntax provides operations for matching DPs inserted in D-positions with thematic positions also characterizes approaches within the categorial grammar framework. In particular, Cormack (1998a,b) proposes that the [Spec, V] position is filled by an abstract element 0, which passes on the relevant thematic properties to the subject DP, generated directly in Case position. Similarly, the distinction between raising and control in terms of a DP attracting one or two predicates is reminiscent of work within the cat- egorial grammar tradition such as Jacobson™s (1992). What distinguishes the present approach, is mainly the fact that through the &opal MLC + Last Resort the advan- tages of the transformational approach are also retained. 4. Arbitrary control As mentioned in section 1, the elimination of PRO in the contexts of obligatory control can also be achieved in a framework which adopts the standard construal of A-movement as DP-movement, by assuming that a DP can move from one &posi- tion to another, along the lines suggested by O™Neil (1995), Hornstein (1999). Thus for instance in (39) control would be expressed by merging John in the embedded [Spec, V] position and moving it to the matrix [Spec, V], via the embedded [Spec, I], and then to the matrix [Spec, I]: (39) [John I [3&n tried [John to [&hn leave]]]] Under this approach, Homstein (1999) achieves a unification of the MDP with the basic locality principle in grammar, i.e. the MLC, making it equivalent to the present proposal in this respect. However, the two theories can be told apart in at least one environment, namely arbitrary control. Arbitrary control is illustrated in (40) where the embedded infiniti- val verb is apparently not associated with any DP, and ends up being interpreted roughly as having a generic argument: (40) It is hard [to [work]] In the terms of Chomsky (1981), the in~nitival [Spec, to] position hosts a PRO, which in the absence of any avaifable controller, is assigned a free index, and hence arbitrary interpretation. For Homstein (1999), in the absence both of PRO and of any overt DP argument, the only possible analysis consists in assuming that the embed- ded [Spec, to] position is occupied by the other pronominal empty category, pro. There are both empirical and conceptual problems with this latter approach. Thus it is not explained why in English pro would be restricted to exactly the arbitrary control environments. What is more, much current literature argues in favor of the elimination of pro even from the null subject configurations for which it was origi- nally introduced by Chomsky (1982). In particular, Pollock (1996) argues that V is sufficient to delete the strong feature of I in null subject languages, while Platzack 428 M.R. ~anz~~i, A. Roussou i Lingua I10 (2000) 409-447 (1995) treats null subject languages as having a weak (non-lexicalized in our terms) D-feature in I. For the reasons advanced by these authors, and by others including Manzini and Savoia (in press), we conclude that pru is best abandoned; in this per- spective the plz, analysis of arbitrary control, and therefore the standard DP-move- ment approach to obligatory control that forces it is undesirable. What remains to be demonstrated is that our theory predicts the basic facts con- cerning arbitrary control without having recourse to the m-introduction of pronomi- nal empty categories. In present terms, the problem that needs to be solved is that, although the embedded predicate in (40) is apparently left without an argument, this does not lead to a failure of inte~retation. Rather it leads to the inte~retation already noted whereby work takes a variable of a generic operator of some sort as an argument. We can provide a syntactic formalization for this interpretation by assum- ing that an abstract adverb of quantification is available in sentences of this type, which attracts the predicate. More precisely, we can identify the position of the oper- ator with that of finite C. The derivation for (40) therefore takes the form in (41) where finite C attracts the infinitival V: (41) [C [it is hard [to work]]] One argument in favor of C acting as an attractor for the embedded predicate is provided by the fact, noticed in the literature (cf. Bresnan, 1982), that predicates not associated with a lexical DP can be interpreted as having a specific, rather than a generic, argument given the appropriate context. Thus while a generic reading for the non-lexicalized argument is associated with the generic context in (41), a specific reading is associated with the non-lexicalized argument given the specific temporal context in (42): (42) It was hard to work (on that beautiful sunny day). In (41) and (42), then, the interpretation of the non-lexicalized argument varies in accordance with the temporal context. Suppose that the operator in C attracts Tense, exactly as it attracts the lexical predicate. If so, we predict that a generic operator in C determines a generic inte~retation for both the non-lexicalized argument and for Tense in (41) while the presence of a specific operator in C in (42) determines a specific interpretation for them. Remember that it is independently argued in the lit- erature, starting with Enq (1987) that the interpretation of Tense depends on C; see Roussou (in press) for more recent discussion. Indeed we can assume that the attrac- tion properties of the operator in C are always satisfied by Tense, inde~ndentIy of whether they attract a lexical predicate or not. It is important to stress that we predict a correlation between temporal and argu- ment interpretation only when the argument is not lexical: only in this case do they both depend on C. If there is a lexical argument, as in all of the cases of ordinary control considered in previous sections, and it is the lexical argument itself that sat- isfies an argument place in the predicate, we predict no correlation between the generic or specific nature of the lexical argument and that of the temporal context. M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409447 429 For instance, it has been noticed (cf. Brody and Manzini, 1988) that if an overt argu- ment is associated with the matrix predicate in (40) it takes on the role of obligatory controller, as in (43): (43) It is hard for us [to [work]] In present terms us in (43) attracts the embedded predicate, as predicted by the Sco- pal MLC. Indeed in (43) the predicate work is in the immediate attraction scope of the DP us. Since in (43) the interpretation of the argument position of work depends on us, while the interpretation of the matrix Tense depends on C, we expect no cor- relation between the two. In other words, in this case we correctly predict that it is possible to have a specific argument in a generic context. The interaction between temporal and argument interpretation is strictly confined to arbitrary control, which seems to us exactly the correct empirical result. A problem that we have not addressed so far concerns the role played by the expletive it and the matrix predicate in (40)-(42). Since it is a DP, we might expect it to count as the nearest attractor for the embedded, as well as the matrix, predicate. If so, however, we cannot predict the interpretation of the relevant sentences, which as we have seen depends on the matrix C acting as the attractor for at least the embedded predicate. One partial solution consists in saying that only an argument DP, and not an expletive, attracts a predicate. This solution, however, has both con- ceptual and empirical disadvantages. From a purely conceptual point of view we notice that the distinction between arguments and non-arguments is not a feature of DPs but rather a consequence of the derivation associated with them. Thus it is a non-argument if it has an argument associate, and an argument otherwise. The empirical evidence provided by examples such as (44) from Chomsky (1995: 274) strengthens these considerations. (44) contains an instance of there which is exple- tive with respect to another DP; in this latter case the associate DP is ultimately interpreted as the controller of the embedded predicate: (44) There arrived three men (last night) [without identifying themselves] For reasons that have to do with the structure of adjuncts (cf. section 5 below), the interpretation of (44) cannot be obtained by having three men directly attract the embedded predicate. Rather there independently attracts both the embedded predi- cate and three men (see Chomsky, 1995 and Manzini and Savoia, in press, for theo- ries of the expletive-associate pair which involve attraction of some sort or another). This analysis confirms that it is really DPs that attract Vs (predicates in general), independently of whether they are arguments, and not some *argument property of DPs. Returning now to the examples in (40)-(42), we still wish to suggest that the rea- son why it allows C to attract the embedded predicate is connected to the fact that it is an expletive. In particular, note that the control sentence is the associate of it. Under the set of assumptions just adopted, this means that it attracts not only the matrix predicate but also the control sentence. Thus the control sentence comes to be 430 M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou i Lingua 110 (2000/ 409-447 interpreted as the argument of the matrix predicate. What is more, the predicate in the control sentence is not in the scope of ir but only in the scope of the matrix C. Thus it is C that attracts it and determines the ‚arbitrary™ interpretation of its argu- ment. It is worth checking at this point whether the present set of assumptions still allows us to account for raising and superraising. In a simple raising sentence like (18), repeated here as (45), John attracts both the matrix and the embedded predi- cates, that are in its immediate scope, as indicated by the italics: (45) [John I [seems [to [work]]]] Consider then (46~(47). (47) represents an example of su~~aising, classically accounted for by assuming that it intercepts A-movement of the argument across it; (46) is its well-formed counterpart: (46) It seems [that John was told [that Mary left]] (47) *John seems [that it was told [that Mary left]] In (46), John attracts the predicate fold; it attracts the predicate seem which is in its immediate scope and at the same time the associate, in this case the that-clause. The correct interpretation ensues, with the that-sentence taken as the argument of seem. Consider next the superraising example in (47). The intended interpretation, under which John is an argument of told, is blocked by the S&opal MLC; indeed John can- not attract told because told is in the immediate scope of it. Other construals of the sentence are equally excluded. In particular, although seem is in the immediate scope of John, and can be attracted by it on the basis of the Scopal MLC, we assume that the interpretive requirements of John cannot be satisfied by a predicate like seem, as can be seen from the ungrammaticality of *John seems. In classical terms this corre- sponds to the absence of theta-roles associated with the seem class of verbs; if the features of a predicate that arguments attract turn out to be different, we can never- theless assume that essentially the same solution applies, namely that a verb like seem lacks them. The analysis of control presented in this section and in the preceding one depends of course on the idea that the C position of the control complement does not have any operators that block a~raction of the embedded predicate by a higher DP or finite C. If such attractors were present, we would not be able to derive obligatory control in (4)-(5), as well as in (43). Furthermore, with respect to arbitrary control we would not be able to predict that the interpretation of the non-lexicalized argu- ment co-varies with that of the matrix Tense as in (40)-(42). The absence of appro- priate operators in the infinitival C can in turn be connected to the absence of tem- poral properties in infinitivals. This conclusion directly contradicts the conclusions of Chomsky and Lasnik (1995), whose null Case for PRO is supported by temporal properties associated with to (cf. Martin, 1996). This latter view is apparently con- firmed by the observation of Bresnan (1972) and Stowell (1982) that a future inter- pretation is associated with the controlled infinitival in examples of the type in (4) or M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou / Lingua 110 (2000) 409d47 431 (6). Though the observation is in itself correct, we believe that it does not argue for temporal properties associated with infinitival I. Rather, the future interpretation can be taken to support a modal characterization for infinitivals (see Roussou, in press). Recent work by BoSkoviC (1997) seeks to provide further arguments in favor of the temporal analysis of control clauses based on a comparison between English and French. Though a discussion of his data is outside the scope of the present paper, we believe that the modal-based approach, or eventually an aspectual one, accounts for them as well. Let us summarize so far. On the basis of the Scopal MLC and of the appropriate assumptions concerning attractors, the present theory is able to derive the following theorem: a predicate is necessarily attracted by the first argument DP or finite C that c-commands it. This in turn means that what in standard terms is an arbitrary PRO can only surface if there is no DP argument in the clause that immediately contains the control clause. Thus arbitrary control is impossible in (43) though forced in (40)-(42). The operator that we have postulated in C independently acts as an attrac- tor for Tense and is associated with it in all finite environments. Other empirical consequences can be made to follow from what precedes. Sup- pose we embed (40) under a higher sentence, as in (48): (48) John thinks [that it is hard [to work]]. In (48) two interpretations are available for the predicate in the control sentence; remember that in (48) the control sentence itself is the associate of it and its scope is therefore the same as the subject™s. The first reading, the arbitrary one, depends on work being attracted by an operator associated with the intermediate C. There is, however, a second reading, with John interpreted as an argument of work. Our the- ory clearly predicts that this reading cannot depend on control by John, in the sense defined so far, that is on the attraction of the predicate by John. Indeed the temporal operator in the intermediate C acts as an attractor for work, as we have just seen, effectively preventing John from attracting it. There is an alternative way to obtain the desired reading though. We have already assumed that the embedded finite C is associated with an operator that attracts work. We suggest that the interpretation whereby John is the argument of work also depends on this derivation. As we have seen, the argument of a predicate attracted by the operator in C can be interpreted as generic or specific; in this latter case we assume that it can be anaphoric to a DP. Hence the non-lexicalized argument of work can be interpreted as anaphoric to John. In this respect we follow a long tradition in control studies (Williams, 1980; Bresnan, 1982, and many subsequent works includ- ing Homstein, 1999), which suggests that the non-obligatory long-distance variety of control is to be treated in the same terms as arbitrary control. At the same time, con- trary to the works just mentioned, the present theory introduces a parallelism between ‚obligatory™ and ‚non-obligatory™ control, to the extent that both phenomena reflect the (obligatory) attraction of a predicate by an appropriate attractor. The only difference is that a DP is the closest attractor in the case of obligatory control and a finite C is the closest attractor in the case of non-obligatory control. 432 M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409447 One question that remains to be addressed concerns the +human interpretation that appears to be necessarily attached to arbitrary PRO. This apparently provides a good argument in favor of the approach of Chomsky and Lasnik (1995) since their PRO can be endowed with a feature such as +human in the lexicon. In a language like Italian, furthermore, the feature specification of arbitrary PRO can include +masculine, +plural, since participles and adjectives are seen to agree with it in these features. However, if this is the case for arbitrary PRO, then there must be a separate lexical entry for non-arbitrary PRO which has as many combinations of lexical fea- tures as its antecedents. This result appears to be unparsimonious. Nor is it likely that a feature like +plural can be construed as a default, even if one were to overcome general theoretical objections to the notion of default itself (on these points see Manzini and Savoia, in press). In this connection, Williams (1992) points out the similarity between arbitrary con- trol and logophoricity. Thus elements that behave logophorically such as long-dis- tance anaphors typically target as their antecedent, ﬁthe source of the report, the per- son with respect to whose consciousness (or ﬁselfﬂ) the report is made, and the person from whose point of view the report is madeﬂ (Sells, 1987: 445). Naturally, all of these characterizations point to a +human antecedent for logophors. We therefore conclude that an operator attracting a predicate leads to a logophoric reading of its argument; hence the surfacing of +human properties for arbitrary control. We shall return to the issue of logophoricity, and its syntactic or pragmatic nature, in section 6.ﬂ 5 It should be noted at this point that the theory presented in the text crucially relies on two highly con- ventional sets of data from the body of literature on control, specifically in English, namely that [Spec, I] is PRO or trace (in the terms of Chomsky, 1981) when I is infinitival, and that obligatory and non- obligatory control have two clearly distinct distributions. Both of these empirical generalizations have been called into question more than once in the literature concerning languages other than English. Thus there are languages where control environments are characterized by the presence of overtly lexicalized pronouns/anaphors; Italian is actually one of these, as seen in examples like (i) whose relevance in this connection was first noticed by Borer (1989) (cf. Burzio, 1986; Belletti, 1998). (i) Gianni vuole andare lui John wants to go he Furthermore Manzini (1983) noted that at least in Italian non-obligatory control seems to distribute over all control contexts, since shifts of controller from object to subject are in general possible. Nor is arbi- trary control proper excluded, as for instance in (ii): (ii) Gianni vuole mangiare (tutti) insieme John wants to eat (ah) together Data from Italian dialects presented by Manzini and Savoia (in preparation) provide an even more lib- eral picture, with many dialects allowing full lexical subjects. Such data are ignored here; Manzini and Savoia (in preparation) are led to propose an analysis different from the one supported here, though fully compatible with our theoretical framework. Adopting the idea that subjects correspond not to [Spec, I] positions but rather to specialized [Spec, D] positions (Manzini and Savoia, in press), the idea is to assume the presence of a D-position in control sentences as well; this move is actually necessitated by the presence of lexical subjects, whether pronominal/anaphoric or not. All control is then treated in the same terms in which arbitrary, or non-obligatory control has been treated here, i.e. as attraction by an (individual or generic) operator in C; this predicts the fundamentally non-obligatory character of control. Thus in effect the phenomenon, i.e. control, for which the matching of two theta-roles with a single argu- ment was first proposed, in this article and by Hornstein (1999) would actually not instantiate such a derivation. Remember however that Manzini and Savoia actually exploit the same derivation for a dif- ferent set of contexts (cf. the discussion in footnote 4). M.R. Munzini. A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409-147 433 5. Other consequences for control In sections 2-4, we established that the &opal MLC is observed by Attract involving predicates, in that the closest DP or C attractor, is obligatorily targeted. There is, however, a second major constraint on Attract, whose effects on control we should in principle be able to observe, namely Connectedness, as formulated in (22). The relevant environments correspond of course to the classical strong island ones, namely adjuncts and subjects. Consider first control into adjuncts. As is well known, adjuncts tend to display the same properties as complements with respect to control. Thus the only possible interpretation for the adjunct infinitival in (49)-(50) is one in which the embedded predicate is associated with the matrix subject: (49) John left before eating. (50) John left without asking. One possible interpretation of this fact is that, as suggested by Kayne (1994), right adjunction is not allowed by the grammar; therefore the embedded sentences in (49)-(50) are attached as complements. This analysis, however, is in direct contra- diction with a number of other properties of adverbials, as argued in detail by Manzini (1995). One property which is of direct interest here, is that in general, a matrix object cannot serve as controller for an adverbial. Thus (51)-(52) have exactly the same control properties as their counterparts in (49)-(50) despite the insertion of an object in the matrix sentence: (51) John left us before eating. (52) John left us without asking. If adverbials are generated in the most deeply embedded position in (51)-(52) as suggested for simple adverbs by Larson (1988), then control by the object should be possible and in fact obligatory by the MDP or the Scopal MLC. Therefore, as pointed out by Williams (1974), the subject orientation of most adverbials argues in favor of the conclusion that they are attached high enough not to be in the scope of the object. Incidentally the same conclusion excludes the possibility that in (44) the associate could directly control the embedded predicate. Thus adverbials are not in complement position, but rather adjuncts. We have inde- pendent evidence that in the case of wh-movement, extraction from adjuncts is blocked, as in (53) below. Therefore if control in (49)-(52) is to be construed as attraction of the embedded predicate by the matrix subject, the question arises why this is not blocked as an instance of adjunct island violation. However, adjunct islands can be circumvented by parasitic gaps. Thus for &-movement, the adjunct. island violation in (53) contrasts with the well-formed parasitic gap configuration in (54): (53) *Which article did you review my book [without reading t] (54) Which book did you review t [without reading e] 434 M.R. ~u~~~ni~ A. Roussou I™ Lingua 110 (2000) 409-447 This suggests that subject control in (49)-(52) also reflects an underlying parasitic gap-like configuration. Consider indeed (49) in terms of the present theory. Assum- ing that the befog sentence is generated as a sister to the highest VP-shell projec- tion, the relevant structure is as in (55): (5.5) John I [left [before I [eating]]] In (55) we independently know that the DP John attracts the matrix predicate, which is on the main branch of the sentence. But if so, attraction of the embedded predi- cate, which is on the adjunct branch, by JO/W creates a parasitic gap con~guration, as desired. This can be most simply illustrated by comparison with (54), where a sin- gle antecedent, the w/z-phrase, binds a trace in the main branch of the sentence and a trace inside the adjunct, as schematized in (56). Similarly in (53, a single DP, John, acts as an attractor for both the predicate in the main branch of the sentence and for the predicate inside the adjunct, as schematized in (57): / \ which book VP VP PP . . . . +Y&&-&& before . . . . CP (57) left before CP M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua I10 (2000) 409447 435 As we did for control into complements, we can now consider the interaction of control into adjuncts with passivisation. In the cases illustrated in (58)-(59) below, the argument DP in matrix [Spec, I] functions as the attractor for the embedded predicate. This is correctly predicted by our theory on the basis of the Scopal MLC as well as Connectedness. As can be seen by the comparison between the active forms in (b) and the passive forms in (a), we find a switch of the thematic properties of controllers, since in passives it is the patient that con- trols the embedded predicate, while in actives it is the agent that does so. Our the- ory thus predicts that notions such as agent and patient are irrelevant for control; instead the embedded predicate in the adjunct is attracted by the closest DP con- nected to it. As we have argued for the case of control into complements, in short passives, the agent is not syntactically projected and cannot therefore interfere with control. (58) a. John was fired after doing that. b. We fired John after doing that. (59) a. John was hired without moving a finger. b. We hired John without moving a finger. One apparent counterexample to the above conclusions is represented by control into purpose clauses. Well-known examples of the type in (60) are generally taken to show that the agent is syntactically realized in passives, and acts as a controller for the adjunct (cf. Brody and Manzini, 1988): (60) The boat was sunk [(in order) to collect the insurance]. In order to account for (60), we are led to assume that the control sentence is adjoined to a projection higher than the VP to which we adjoined the adjunct sen- tences in (49)-(52). Indeed, it is necessary and sufficient for us to assume that the purpose clause is attached high enough in the matrix sentence to be outside the scope of the subject, in order to predict that it is not controlled by the subject under the Scopal MLC. Following fairly standard assumptions, we can associate the purpose clause with an IP-adjoined position, as in (61): (61) CP IP CP DP IP 436 M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua I10 (2000) 409447 The fact that the embedded predicate in (61) becomes associated with the arbi- trary interpretation is in present terms due to it being attracted by the matrix C. This also follows form the Scopal MLC, since the matrix C is the first attractor that takes the adjunct predicate in its scope. Note that Connectedness is also satis- fied, in that the matrix C equally attracts the matrix I for reasons of Tense inter- pretation. Therefore, the attraction path from matrix C to the adjunct predicate forms a connected subtree together with the matrix attraction path from C to I. This analysis does not take into account the intuition that the argument of the embedded predicate is interpreted as anaphoric to the agent of the passivized matrix predicate. Since we independently argued that in short passives the agent is not syntactically represented, we are led to impute this intuition to pragmatic inference. Note that if purpose clauses are adjoined to a position which is outside the scope of the matrix subject, we predict that their predicate is not controlled by it even in active environments, for instance in (62). Hence we are led to claim that the appar- ent control of the embedded predicate by the matrix subject in (62) reduces to arbi- trary control and anaphora, essentially as in the case of apparent long-distance con- trol in (48): (62) We sank the boat [(in order) to collect the insurance] In other words, the matrix C acts as an attractor for the adjunct predicate, licencing a specific interpretation, anaphoric to some argument in the sentence. Once again, we impute the fact that the second interpretation is in fact the only possible one to a pragmatic inference factor. We are now in a position to consider control into the other major type of strong islands, namely subjects. The relevant data are of the type in (63): (63) John believes [that [behaving badly at the party] I would bother Mary] (63) is a typical context of non-obligatory control; indeed the non-lexicalized argu- ment in the subject clause can be interpreted as arbitrary, or as anaphoric to either the matrix argument, John, or to the embedded one, Mary. Leaving aside the ques- tion of subject islandhood for a moment, this state of affairs is as expected, given that the nearest attractor of the appropriate sort for the embedded predicate is the operator in the intermediate C. The DP-argument Mary cannot act as an attractor because it does not take the subject sentence in its scope, while the DP-argument John is higher, and thus further away than the intermediate C in terms of the Scopal MLC. In turn attraction of the control predicate by the intermediate C is compatible either with an arbitrary interpretation or with an interpretation anaphoric to some individual(s) in the discourse, including John/Mary. As for the question whether the intermediate C is accessible to the gerund under Connectedness, remember that wh-extraction from a subject is barred; however, if a parasitic gap configuration is involved, Connectedness is satisfied, as seen in the contrast in (64): M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua I10 (2000) 4091147 431 (64) a. *Who do [friends of t] admire you b. Who do [friends of e] admire t Therefore in (63), the gerund can be attracted by the intermediate C, since this attrac- tion path forms a connected subtree with the attraction path independently defined between C and the matrix I for reasons of Tense interpretation. This yields a deriva- tion of the type in (65): (65) ﬁ..-----------lp----- /K , /‚I‚\\ C IP would VP I .*.. V ..* In short, both the fact that non-finite subject sentences are typical contexts of non- obligatory control and the fact that non-finite adjuncts typically display obligatory control can be explained on principled grounds. The alternation between obligatory and non-obligatory control depends on whether the closest attractor is a DP argu- ment (as for adjuncts) or a C (as for subjects). As for the possibility of reaching into strong islands, this arguably depends on the creation of parasitic gap-like configura- tions. Thus a DP subject can attract two predicates, one in the main branch of the sentence and one inside an adjunct. Similarly a C can attract an I in the main branch of the sentence and a predicate inside a subject sentence. The conclusion that control into adjuncts amounts to the creation of a parasitic-gap configuration is also put for- ward by Homstein (1997), though it is embedded under a completely different analy- sis of parasitic gaps; furthermore, his analysis does not readily extend to control into subject sentences. Before concluding the discussion of control, another notoriously problematic set of data is worth reviewing briefly. We have so far illustrated control with embedded non-finite sentences. However, it is well known that in appropriate contexts, such as interrogatives and exclamatives, infinitivals are acceptable as matrix sentences, as for instance in (66)-(67): (66) What to do? (67) Ah, to go to the sea! What is more, it appears that interrogative sentences embedded as complements to matrix verbs, do not display obligatory but rather optional control effects, as in (68): 438 M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409-447 (68) I asked how [to behave]. Consider first (66)-(67). Because there obviously is no tensed C which takes the infinitival in its scope, our general theory about the licensing of arbitrary control depends on assuming that some other operator can act as an appropriate attractor for the infinitival predicate. As it turns out, this operator can be identified with the one licensing the apparently exceptional matrix use of the infinitival, say some interrog- ative/exclamative modal operator. If the same operator is present in the embedded context in (68), we fully predict that it will license the arbitrary reading of the non- lexicalized argument of the embedded predicate, preempting control by the matrix subject. 6. Further consequences for A-movement In our discussion of A-movement in section 2, we argued that the fundamental role of A-movement in the grammar is that of conveying theta properties to DP-posi- tions, where arguments are realized. In the alternative formalization that we pro- vided, a similar role is played by the attraction of predicates by DPs. This construal of A-movement explains the lack of reconstruction effects at LF and the blocking of PF rules.6 A number of other facts standardly associated with A-movement remain to be considered. One of them is the triggering of agreement. Let us for instance consider an unaccusative sentence in Italian including an embedded past participle. The sub- ject overtly agrees with the past participle in number and gender, as in (69): (69) Maria e partita. Mary is left-sg.fem. ‚Mary has left.™ Under standard assumptions about A-movement the derivation of (69) proceeds along the following lines: Maria moves through [Spec, v]; this configuration trig- gers agreement between Maria and the past participle, though Maria is ultimately realized in [Spec, I], as illustrated in (70): (70) Maria e [Maria partita] In the present framework, Maria is merged directly in [Spec, I], while the lexical verb is attracted by Maria, without Copy and Merge applying at any point in the ™ In terms of the present analysis the lack of blocking effects at PF in control and raising contexts is due to the absence of a D feature/position in the complement clause, i.e. the lack of any lexical material. However, if we assume that control complements at least have a D-position, as mentioned in footnote 6, then the relevant phonosyntactic effects will have to be attributed to the presence of an ‚inactive™ D-posi- tion (see Roussou, 1999). derivation. If that is the case, the question that arises is what triggers agreement between Maria and the past participle at all. We assume that the past participle, exactly like the DP, is associated with q-features in the lexicon, agreeing in this with Chomsky (1995). On the other hand, we have already established that for reasons entirely independent of agreement, the DP attracts the lexical V. In this framework agreement of the q-features present on the DP and those present on the past partici- ple can be seen simply as a reflex of the Attract operation that involves these two elements. Manzini and Savoia (in press) show that this approach also extends to con- figurations standardly taken to involve agreement with pru. Another set of problems that we need to consider concerns one of the arguments that we put forward for our approach to A-movement, namely the lack of recon- struction effects. Though data of the type in (11) seem to provide a clear-cut argu- ment against reconstruction of A-traces, other data have been held to support it. In particular, Belletti and Rizzi (1988) point out contrasts of the type in (71): (7 1) a. Pictures of himself worry John/him. b. *Himself worries John/him. They argue that the grammaticality of (71a) is due to reconstruction of the derived subject, i.e. pictured of ~zi~zse~f, into its thematic position, which they take to be lower in the VP-shell than the position of the Experiencer Jo~?~~h~rn. If so, (71b) can no longer be excluded by the impossibility of reconstruction. Therefore they suggest that Principles B and C of Chomsky™s (198 1) Binding Theory must be satisfied at S- structure, whereas Principle A can be satisfied in their terms either at D-structure or at S-structure, i.e. equivalently at S-structure or at LF in a theory that uses recon- struction. Under this set of assumptions, both (71a) and (71b) are well-formed with respect to Principle A. (71b) is independently excluded in that it represents a viola- tion of Binding Principles B/C at S-structure, given that the object John/him is (locally) bound by the subject, contrary to (71a). Crucially, Belletti and Rizzi (1988) make reference to two levels of representa- tion, and this is not consistent with minimalist assumptions. What is more, this recourse to two different levels of representation cannot easily be mimicked within the more limited theoretical resources of minimalism. If we say that both the derived and the trace position count at LF, we can of course derive the ungrammaticality of (7lb), but we have no way of deriving the grammaticality of (71a), since in its derived position himself is not bound by John/him. If the subject DP on the other hand is interpreted only in its reconstructed position, we have the original problem of not being able to account for the ungrammaticality of (71b). Data of the type in (71a) can also be reproduced for standard raising configura- tions, as in (72): (72) Pictures of each other seem to them [to be on sale] We believe that the correct approach for this kind of examples is the one proposed by Reinhart and Reuland (1993). They argue in essence that self moves to the clos- 440 M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409447 est predicate, marking it as reflexive. Therefore the interpretation of John likes him- self is determined by an abstract structure of the form John self-likes him where the reflexively marked predicate forces coreference between John and him. Disjoint ref- erence in John likes him corresponds to the absence of a reflexive marker on the predicate. Given this analysis, since the anaphoric construal of himself depends on self acting as a reflexivizer of the nearest predicate, apparent anaphors inside (pit- ture-)DPs bound across sentence boundaries as in (73a), must correspond to logophors. This conclusion is independently supported by a number of facts; for instance a first person anaphor can appear in picture-DPs freely, as in (73b): (73) a. Lucie thought that a picture of herself would be nice on that wall. b. A picture of myself would be nice on that wall. Note that though Reinhart and Reuland (1993) like Sells (1987) conceive the con- strual of logophors in pragmatic terms, this conclusion need not be subscribed to. Thus we could assume that self in its logophoric interpretation is attracted by a syn- tactic position, even though one different from the predicate. The point that at least the Icelandic logophor sig is subject to syntactic ‚movement™ is argued for by Manzini (forthcoming) on the grounds that elements like sig obey strong islands and show parasitic gap effects. Though the distribution of logophoric himself is different from that of logophoric sig, we then assume that a syntactic account is equally pos- sible. Remember that according to Williams (1992), arbitrary control itself repre- sents an instance of logophoric interpretation. We suggest therefore that the correct syntax for logophoric himself might be roughly the same as for arbitrary control, i.e. attraction by the nearest finite C. On this understanding we expect logophoric him- self to systematically appear inside subject islands, as in (73), exactly like arbitrary control. In short, data of the type in (73) argue not for reconstruction, but for the existence of a logophoric himself. This in turn raises doubts concerning all arguments for movement as Copy and Merge based on the reconstruction of himself, including those presented by Chomsky (1995) for wh-movement and reproduced in (10). As we already remarked at the outset, a discussion of A™-movement is beyond the scope of the present paper (see Roussou, 1999). What is relevant for present purposes is that the availability of a logophoric binding account for (73) and the like neutralizes the potential counterargument to our construal of A-movement. On the basis of the discussion that precedes, we uphold Chomsky™s (1995) gener- alization that A-movement cannot be reconstructed. This in turn provides a straight- forward and powerful argument in favor of our approach, as opposed to the standard DP-movement one. This conclusion does not hold of the reformulation of A-move- ment proposed by Sportiche (1999). Sportiche also recognizes the difficulty repre- sented for DP-movement by contrasts of the type in (71). Thus he proposes that the D-head of the DP is merged in the position where it surfaces, essentially as proposed here; if the reflexive in (71 b) corresponds to such a head, he predicts that it does not reconstruct. By contrast the NP-predicate is always merged in the thematic position, and NP-movement takes place systematically from thematic to D-position. Thus an M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409-447 441 anaphor in the NP-predicate, as in (71a), can give rise to reconstruction effects. But as we have seen, all of the evidence in favor of DP-/NP-movement from reconstruc- tion of anaphors can be circumvented, thus depriving Sportiche™s theory of an important empirical basis. Furthermore, the lack of blocking effects on PF rules is not explained by Sportiche™s approach either. A second set of reconstruction phenomena, not discussed by Chomsky (1995), but prominent for instance in the discussion of Sportiche (1999) concerns the recon- struction of scope. These have often been argued to mirror an underlying structural difference between raising and control and are therefore addressed in this connection by Homstein (1998) as well. One basic set of data is provided by May (1985) under the heading of lowering. As May (1985) notices, a raising sentence like (74) with a negative quantifier in the matrix subject position is ambiguous: it can be understood as a denial of belief, or as an assertion of belief, namely that there are no agents that are spies: (74) No agent is believed by Philby to be a spy for the other side. Crucially, in raising structures the same ambiguity does not characterize elements other than the raised subject, as can be seen from (75); and the interpretation of quantified subjects of control sentences is equally unambiguous, as illustrated in (76) : (75) Philby is believed by no agent to be a spy for the other side. (76) Some agent promised Philby to be a spy for the other side. From this set of observations May (1985) argues that the reading of (74) in which the negative quantifier is within the scope of believe is due to lowering of the quan- tifier into its trace position. Under classical assumptions in the Principles and Para- meters framework, such an operation ‚can be excluded from control environments such as (76), given that the embedded subject position is occupied by PRO. There are two problems that the present theory meets in considering these data; the first has to do with the possibility of lowering itself, which is under current the- oretical assumptions excluded, and the second with predicting the differences between raising and control. Let us begin with the first problem. Consider (74) again. In terms of the present theory (74) involves a dependency between no agent and the embedded predicate (be) a spy. The existence of such a dependency can be taken to imply that the scope of the quantifier corresponds either to the position where it is merged or to the lower predicate position which it attracts, without resort- ing to copying of the argument into the lower theta-position. Remember that the argument for full lexical copies given by Chomsky (1995) involves examples such as (10) where what must be present in the trace position is a subconstituent (the anaphor) of the phrase being moved (the wh-phrase), while the landing site in turn contains the head of the phrase. Thus copying of the lexical con- tent must indeed be involved, so as to allow for some of it to be interpreted in one position and some in another (but cf. footnote 3). Nothing of the sort applies in 442 M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409-447 examples such as (74). If copying must be resorted to in (74) it need only be feature copying, i.e. copying of the categorial Q(uantifier) feature of the head of IZO agent. We believe, on the other hand, that in this as in the other cases in which feature copies have originally been invoked it is only as a notational variant for the more elementary process of attraction (cf. the discussion in section 1 vs. section 2) or dependency formation. Going back to our original definition of attraction in (20™) we tentatively suggest that the ordered pair of features (D/Q, ) formed by the operation is interpretable in the position of either feature. Needless to say, the theory just sketched accounts for the impossibility of scope ambiguities in (75) in the absence of an embedded predicate position connected with the matrix quantifier. The one remaining problem concerns therefore the distinction between raising contenxts such as (74) and control contexts such as (76). As already anticipated this problem is addressed by Homstein (1998) as well. In his terms con- trol and raising do of course result from a process of conventional movement: there- fore reconstruction in raising contexts proceeds along standard lines. Of the various copies in a chain only one must survive at the LF interface; the ambiguity in sen- tences like (74) derives from the possibility of deleting the higher or lower copy of the raised quantifier. In control environments such as (76), on the other hand, a copy no lower than the matrix theta-position must survive, carrying the embedded theta- role as well. Lower copies would carry only the embedded theta-role, leaving the matrix theta-role unsatisfied at LF. While Homstein™s (1998, 1999) solution is based on assumptions different from ours to be immediately adopted, it is useful to refer to. In particular, it helps us make the point that the present theory, no less than the other theories under review, can make the required distinction between raising and control in terms of the number of theta-positions involved. Thus suppose that as proposed above, the ordered pair of features (D, 0) formed by attraction is interpretable in the position of either feature. Suppose, however, two such dependencies are involved as in control, say (D, Cl,), (D, 0,). In this case, essentially as proposed by Homstein (1998), the only construal which provides an interpretable output has both sets of (D, 0) pairs associated with the D-position, i.e. with the one position they share. Interpreting the D-feature in the t3,-position would necessarily lead to an inconsistency with the interpretation of the D-features in the (D, 0,) pair, which does not include 8,. Similarly, interpreting the D-feature in association with the &position would leave 0, out, yielding once again an inconsistent interpretation.™ ™ Another phenomenon that brings quantifiers to bear on the distinction between raising and control is well-known from the discussion of Chomsky (1981), Burzio (1986) who point out a contrast between (i) and (ii): (i) One interpreter each seems to have been assigned to the visiting diplomats. (ii) *One interpreter each tried to be assigned to the visiting diplomats. Each is construed not with an interpreter, i.e. the distributee, but with the visiting diplomat, i.e. the dis- tributor. This is made morphologically obvious in Italian by the fact that each agrees in gender with the distributor, as in (iii): (iii) a. Un interprete ciascuno/ *ciascuna fu assegnato ai diplomatici An interpreter-m each-m/ each-f was assigned to the diplomats-m M.R. Munzini, A. Roussou I i&qua 1 IO (ZOOO) 4091147 443 Further evidence potentially relevant here comes from the interaction between binding r~constm~tion and scope reconstruction. For instance Brody (1996) quotes the following examples from Lebeaux, where (78) is considerably worse than (77): (77) (78) [Hisi mother™slj bread seems to [every man], to be known by herj to be the best there is. ﬁ[His, mother™slj bread seems to herj to be known by [every manli to be the best there is. The argument runs as follows. If in (77) his mother™s bread is reconstructed in the intermediate subject position, his is in the scope of every man and his motlzer c-com- mands her; this yields a weal-foxed inte~retat~on. In (77), on the other hand, if his ~zother™s bread is reconstructed within the scope of eveP-;il, it is also reconstructed in a position c-commanded by her, which means that the resulting representation is ruled out by Principle B. If his mother™s bread is not reconstructed, the structure is ruled out by whatever principle requires bound pronouns to be in the scope of their operator. We propose on the contrary that in (77)-(78) the binding of his is accomplished not by reconstruction of his mother, but rather by QR of every: this latter operation is successful when every raises from the matrix sentence, but not when it raises from an embedded one. Though our analysis is still tentative, it does make a clear predic- tion, namely that substituting any other pronoun for her in (78), as in (79), yields a sentence which is still worse than (77). Judgements are subtle, but native speakers at best assign to (79) an inte~ediate status between (77) and (78). We can therefore b. Una guida ciascuno/ *ciascuna fu assegnata ai diplomatici A guide-f each-m/ each-f was assigned to the diplomats-m c. Un interprete *ciascuno/ ciascuna fu assegnato alle mogli An interpreter-m each-m/ each-f was assigned to the wives-f d. Una guida-f *ciascuno/ ciascuna fu assegnata alle mogli A guide each-m/ each-f was assigned to the wives-f In order to explain the data in (i)-(ii) a theory of each, hence of distributivity, is clearly needed. Though this is largely outside the scope of the present article. we can nevertheless consider briefly what an account of (i)-(ii) might involve. FolIowing Beghelli and Stowell (1997) we assume that the structure of the sentence includes a projection that acts as a host for distributive quantifiers, namely DistP, which is the highest quantificational position below the inflectional ones. For the sake of the present discussion we shall in fact identify the surface position of each with DistP. According to Beghelli and Stowell (1997: 93) ﬁan active Dist head selects a ShareP . . . which in turn requires that an existential QP appear in Spec of SharePﬂ, corresponding to the distributee. In (i)-(ii), however, the distributee, being in [Spec, I], is higher than ShareP and is therefore not available to fill its Spec. In such cases Beghelli and Stow- ell (1997) assume movement of a ﬁcovert existential quantifier over eventsﬂ to this position. Our idea is that in the raising case in (i) a successful interpretation is reached in that the matrix ShareP can be associated with a quantification over the embedded ussign event, which is the only event whose participants (in thematic or aspectual terms) include distributor and distributee. In the control case in (ii), on the other hand, a successful interpretation would require that both a quantification over the matrix and the embedded event be associated with the same matrix ShareP. This we take to be impossi- ble, as desired. 444 h4.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409-447 group (78) and (79) together, attributing any residual contrast to their different rela- tive complexity: 8 (79) (*)His mother™s bread seems to us to be known by every man to be the best there is. Finally, it should be noticed that the present theory of A-movement is not compati- ble with the analysis of floating quantifiers argued for in Sportiche (1988) accord- ing to which quantifiers such as tous in French are stranded in their base-generated thematic position by leftward movement of the D. Although this analysis has proven very influential, there are several pieces of evidence that cast doubt on it, as argued by Bobaljik (1998) quite independently of the present theory. 7. Conclusion To conclude, in section 1 we argued that there are empirical and conceptual prob- lems for the classical construal of control, involving PRO, as well as for that of A- movement. In section 2 we argued that an alternative formalization for A-movement is possible within the minimalist framework, whereby DPs are merged directly in D- position, where they attract predicates from the VP-shell. This alternative formaliza- tion for A-movement, which effectively eliminates DP-traces, is supported by the lack of reconstruction effects at LF and of blocking effects on rules at PF. What is more, the theory proposed in section 2 allows for a straightforward account of con- trol which dispenses with PRO. Quite simply, control corresponds to the case in which more than one predicate is attracted by the same DP-argument. In section 4, we concentrated on one difference between our approach and O™Neil™s (1995) and Homstein™s (1999), for whom control reduces to DP-movement and arbitrary control must therefore involve an empty pronominal subject pro. In present terms, the empty category pro can be eliminated from the grammar as well. Arbitrary control reduces to the case where a predicate is controlled by an operator in C, rather than by a DP- argument. Throughout sections 3-4, we showed that the distribution of PRO, the distribution of antecedents for controlled PRO, and the distribution of controlled and arbitrary PRO are determined uniquely by the interplay of Attract with the MLC, which we construe as &opal MLC. Similarly, in section 5, we explained obligatory control into adjuncts as a by-product of parasitic gap-like patterns of predicate attraction pre- dicted by Connectedness. Arbitrary control into subjects amounts to the same, with the difference that an operator in C acts as the attractor, rather than a DP-argument. In section 6, we turned to A-movement again considering more complex data involv- ing reconstruction and other LF effects. x More interactions between binding and scope are considered by Fox (1999) and Sportiche (1999). M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409-447 445 References Arad, M., 1998. VP-structure and the syntax-lexicon interface. Doctoral dissertation, University College London. Baker, M., K. Johnson and I. Roberts, 1989. Passive arguments raised. Linguistic Inquiry 20, 219-251. Beghelli, F. and T. Stowell, 1997. Distributivity and negation. In: A. Szabolcsi (ed.), Ways of scope-tak- ing, 71-107. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Belletti, A., 1998. ‚Inversion™ as focalization. Manuscript, Universita di Siena. Belletti, A. and L. Rizzi, 1988. Psych-verbs and H-theory. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 6, 291-352. Bennis, H. and T. Hoekstra, 1984. Gaps and parasitic gaps. The Linguistic Review 4, 29-87. Bobaljik, J., 1995. Morphosyntax: The syntax of verbal inflection. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cam- bridge, MA. Bobaljik, J., 1998. Floating quantifiers: Handle with Care. GLOT 3.6, 3-10. Borer, H., 1989. Anaphoric Agr. In: 0. Jaeggli. and K. Safir (eds.), The null subject parameter, 69-109. Dordrecht: Kluwer Borer, H., 1994. The projection of arguments. Umass Occasional Papers 17. GLSA, University of Mass- achusetts, Amherst. BoSkoviC, i., 1997. The syntax of nonfinite complementation: An economy approach. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Bresnan, J., 1972. Theory of complementation in English. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Bresnan, J., 1982. Control and complementation. Linguistic Inquiry 13, 343434. Brody, M., 1996. Some restrictive aspects of perfect syntax. Paper presented at the University of Stuttgart. Brody, M., 1997. Perfect chains. In: L. Haegeman (ed.), Elements of grammar, 139-167. Dordrecht: Kluwer Brody, M., 1999. Relating syntactic elements: Remarks on Norbert Homstein™s ‚Movement and chains™. to appear in Syntax 2. Brody, M. and M.R. Manzini, 1988. On implicit arguments. In: Ruth Kempson (ed.), Mental represen- tations: The interface between language and reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Burzio, L., 1986. Italian syntax. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Castillo J.C., J.E. Drury and K. Grohman, 1999. The status of the merge over move preference. Manu- script, University of Maryland. Chomsky, N., 1975 [1955]. The logical structure of linguistic theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1981. Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris. Chomsky, N., 1982. Some concepts and consequences of the theory of government and binding. Cam- bridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1986. Knowledge of language. New York: Praeger. Chomsky, N., 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1998. Minimalist inquiries: The framework. Manuscript, MIT. Chomsky, N. and H. Lasnik, 1995. The theory of principles and parameters. In: Noam Chomsky, The minimalist, 13-127. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Cinque, G., 1991. Types of A™-dependencies. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press. Cormack, A., 1998a. Definitions: Implications for syntax, semantics and the language of thought. New York: Garland Cormack, A., 1998b. Without specifiers. In: D. Adger, S. Pintzuk, B. Plunkett and G. Tsoulas (eds.), Specifiers: Minimalist approaches. Oxford: Clarendon. Cormack, A. and N. Smith, 1997. Checking features and split signs. UCL Working Papers in Linguistics 9, 223-252. Cormack, A. and N. Smith, 1999. 4.6, 20: Where is a sign merged? GLOT. Enq, M., 1987. Anchoring conditions for tense. Linguistic Inquiry 18, 633657. Fox, D., 1999. Reconstruction, binding theory and the interpretation of chains. Linguistic Inquiry 30, 157-196. 446 M.R. Manzini, A. Roussou I Lingua 110 (2000) 409447 Hale, K. and S.J. Keyser, 1993. On argument structure and the lexical expression of syntactic relations. In: K. Hale and S.J. Keyser (eds.), A view from building 20, 53-109. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Hornstein, N., 1997. Control in GB and minimalism. CLOT 8.2, 3-6. Homstein, N., 1998. Movement and chains. Syntax 1, 999127. Hornstein, N., 1999. On movement and control. Linguistic Inquiry 30, 69-96. Jacobson, P., 1992. Raising without movement. In: R. Larson, S. Iatridou, U. Lahiri and J. Higgin- botham (eds.), Control and grammar, 149-194. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Johnson, K., 1991. Object positions. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 9, 577636. Kayne, R., 1984. Connectedness and binary branching. Dordrecht: Foris. Kayne, R., 1994. The antisymmetry of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Larson, R., 1988. On the double object construction. Linguistic Inquiry 19, 335-391. Larson, R., 1991. Promise and the theory of control. Linguistic Inquiry 22, 103-139. Lebeaux, D., 1985. Locality and anaphoric binding. The Linguistic Review 4, 343-363. Longobardi, G., 1984. Connectedness and island constraints. In: J. Gueron, H.-G. Obenauer and J.-Y. Pollock. Grammatical representation, 169-185. Dordrecht: Foris Manzini, M.R., 1983. On control and control theory. Linguistic Inquiry 14: 421-446. Manzini, M.R., 1995. The position of adjuncts: A reply to Kayne. Quademi de1 Dipartimento di Lin- guistica dell™universita di Firenze 6, 12ll136. Manzini, M.R., 1997. A minimalist theory of weak islands. In: P. Culicover and L. McNally (eds.), The limits of syntax, 1855209. New York: Academic Press. Manzini, M.R., 1998. Dependencies, phrase structure and extractions. In: D. Adger Suzan Pintzuk, B. Plunkett and G. Tsoulas (eds.), Specifiers: Minimalist approaches, 188-205. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Manzini, M.R., forthcoming. Sentential complementation: The subjunctive. In: P. Coopmans, M. Ever- aert and J. Grimshaw (eds.), Lexical selection and lexical insertion. HIL. Manzini, M.R. and L.M. Savoia, 1998. Clitics and auxiliary choice in Italian dialects: Their relevance for the Person ergativity split. Recherches Linguistiques de Vincennes 27, 115-138. Manzini, M.R. and L.M. Savoia, 1999. The syntax of middle-reflexive and object clitics: A case of parametrization in arberesh dialects. In: M. Mandala (ed.), Studi in onore di Luigi Marlekaj, 283-328. Bari: Adriatica. Manzini, M.R. and L.M. Savoia; in press. Parameters of subject inflection in Italian dialects. In: Peter Svenonius (ed.), Subjects, expletives and the EPP. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Manzini, M.R. and L.M. Savoia, forthcoming. The syntax of object clitics: Si in Italian dialects, In: G. Cinque (eds.), Festschrift Renzi. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Manzini, M.R. and L.M. Savoia, in preparation. I dialetti italiani. Bologna: 11 Mulino. Martin, R., 1996. A minimalist theory of PRO and control. Doctoral dissertation, University of Con- necticut, Storm. May, R., 1985. Logical form. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. O™Neil, J., 1995. Out of control. Proceedings of NELS 25. GLSA, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Pica, P., 1987. On the nature of the reflexivization cycle. Proceedings of NELS 17. GLSA, University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Platzack, C., 1995. Null subjects, weak Agr and syntactic differences in Scandinavian. Working Papers in Scandinavian Syntax 53, 85-106. Pollock, J.-Y., 1996. Langage et cognition: Introduction au programme minimaliste de la grammaire generative. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. POSd, P. and G. Pullum, 1982. The contraction debate. Linguistic Inquiry 13, 122-138 Reinhart, T. and E. Reuland, 1993. Reflexivity. Linguistic Inquiry 24, 657-720. Rizzi, Luigi, 1990. Relativized minimality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Roberts, I. and A. Roussou, 1997. Interface interpretation. Manuscript, University of Stuttgart and Uni- versity of Wales, Bangor. Roberts, I. and A. Roussou, in press. The EPP as a condition on the T-dependency. In: P. Svenonius (ed.), Subjects, expletives and the EPP. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Rosenbaum, P., 1967. The grammar of English predicate complement constructions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. M.R. Manzini. A. Roussou I Lingua I10 (20001409d47 441 Roussou, A., 1999. Features and subject dependencies: That-t phenomena revisited. Manuscript, Uni- versity of Cyprus. Roussou, A., in press. Control and raising in and out of subjunctive complements. In: B. Joseph, A. Ralli and M.-L. River0 (eds.), Comparative syntax of balkan languages. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Salles, H., 1997. Prepositions and the syntax of complementation. Doctoral dissertation, University of Wales, Bangor. Sells, P., 1987. Aspects of logophoricity. Linguistic Inquiry 18, 445480. Sportiche, D., 1988. A theory of floating quantifiers and its corollaries for constituent structure. Lin- guistic Inquiry 19, 425449. Sportiche, D., 1999. Reconstruction, movement and scope. Paper presented at the University of Venice. Stowell, T., 1982. The tense of infinitives, Linguistic Inquiry 13, 561-570. Tenny, C., 1994. Aspectual roles and the syntax-semantics interface. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Williams. E., 1974. Rule ordering in syntax. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Williams, E., 1980. Predication. Linguistic Inquiry 11, 208-238. Williams, E., 1992. Adjunct control. In: R. Larson, S. Iatridou, U. Lahiri and J. Higginbotham (eds.), Control and grammar, 297-332. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 