ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 391-408 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua On raising in Tagalogﬂ Masanori Nakamura* School of Business Administration, Senshu University, 2-I-I Higashi-Mita, Tama-ku, Kawasaki 214-8580, Japan Received 17 May 1999; revised version 28 September 1999 Abstract This article focuses on so-called ‚raising™ constructions in Tagalog, an Austronesian lan- guage, and compares them with more familiar raising constructions in languages like English. It is shown that there are interesting differences between English-type raising and its Tagalog- type counterpart. It is argued following Maclachlan (1996) that the differences in question are due to the (non)availability of null operator movement in ‚raising™ contexts (cf. Massam, 1985). They can be accounted for in terms of feature movement (Chomsky, 1995; Takahashi, 1997) within the principles-and-parameters approach where it is claimed that parametric vari- ation is reducible to lexical properties (in the case at hand, those of tense/aspect-related func- tional categories). 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 1. Posing questions Postal (1974) extensively discusses raising constructions in English, illustrated in (1): (1) a. It appears [(that) the child likes chocolate]. b. The childi appears [ti to like chocolate]. c. *The child, appears [(that) t, likes chocolate]. * An earlier version of this paper has been presented at the Generative Linguistics in the Old World Colloquium, held at the Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages in Hyderabad, India, in Jan- uary 1998. Thanks are due to the audience at this event for useful discussion. I would also like to thank anonymous Lingua reviewers for their helpful clarifications and suggestions. All remaining errors are my own. * Phone: +81 44 900 7991; E-mail: masanori@green.an.egg.or.jp 0378-2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(99)00049-2 392 M. Nakamur-a I Lingua 110 (2000) 391408 (la) contains the raising predicate appear but no raising has taken place in the exam- ple; the matrix subject position is occupied by the expletive it and its sentential asso- ciate follows the verb. In (lb) the raising of the DP the child takes place out of the subject position of the infinitival complement. (lc), where the raising has taken place out of the tensed clause, is excluded. Since finite T obligatorily assigns Case in Eng- lish, (lc) is ruled out for Case-related reasons: the DP the child cannot check more than one Case, leading to a crashed derivation, to use Chomsky™s (1995) termi- nology. What is interesting from the viewpoint of parametric syntax is that the Tagalog counterpart of (lc) is well-formed. Tagalog is a verb-initial Austronesian language spoken in the Philippines. Let us consider Tagalog examples in (2): ™ (2) a. Nagmumukha[-ng kumain ang bata ng mangga]. appear(AT)-coMp ate(aT) Ass-child INH-mango ‚It appears that the child ate a mango.™ b. Nagmumukha ang batai [ng kumain ti ng mangga]. appear(AT) Ass-child COMP ate(AT) INH-mango Lit. ‚The child, appears that ti ate a mango.™ In (2a) the thematic subject bata ‚child™ is in the complement clause of the verb mukha ‚appear™. In (2b), on the other hand, it has ‚raised™ into the matrix clause.* Notice that the same verbal form as the one in (2a) is used in (2b). (2b), which is the Tagalog equivalent of English (lc), is grammatical. Its grammaticality raises two immediate questions in (3). (3) a. What is the exact nature of Tagalog ‚raising™? b. What is responsible for the parametric differences in ‚raising™ between Eng- lish-type and Tagalog-type languages? This article is an attempt to answer these questions. To anticipate my answers to them, in reply to (3a), I suggest following Maclachlan (1996) that ‚raising™ in Taga- log, unlike raising in English, involves A™-movement, null operator movement in particular. In reply to (3b), I argue that the cross-linguistic differences are attribut- able to the lexical differences with respect to tense/aspect between the two types of languages. I will refer to Tagalog sentences like (2b) as raising constructions throughout, though they are not really raising constructions in the standard sense of the term. The following is the list of abbreviations used in this paper: ABS - absolutive Case AT - Agent Topic BT - Benefactive Topic COMP - complementizer ERG - ergative Case INH - inherent Case IT - Instrumental Topic LT - Locative Topic PL - plural RPAST - recent past SC - singular TT - Theme Topic 1 - first person 3 - third person The ‚raised™ argument is indicated in bold face throughout. M. ~uka~~ru i Lingua 1 IO (ZOOOJ 391-408 393 2. Proposed analysis Let us address the question in (3a). I present my analysis of raising in Tagalog first, and then turn to a host of evidence that supports the analysis. As mentioned above, I claim that raising constructions in Tagalog like (2b) involve A™-movement3 I take the movement to be null operator movement (Maclachlan, 1996). Let us assume following Takahashi (1997) that null operator movement is actually realized as feature movement. The reason has to do with the economy condition imposed on the operation Attract-F, given in (4) (Chomsky$ 1995: 262). (4) F carries along just enough material for convergence. Since null operator movement is free from PF-crash, there is no need to raise the entire category of a null operator: ah we need to raise is its bundle of features. Under the feature raising analysis, (2b) has the derivation in (5), which resembles the derivation for tough constructions (cf. Massam, 1985) (OP stands for null operator, FF for formal feature). (5) [appear the child [cp FF IOPJ-C [ate [IF fFopll m~wlll (= 2b) In (5) only the formal features of the null operator have been raised and adjoined to the complementizer.4 The DP ‚the child™, generated in the matrix clause, receives its Cl-role from the A/-chain in the complement clause via some sort of chain com- position (see Massam, 1985 for details). It has been argued in the literature that there exists a kind of raising that involves null operator movement. For example, Massam (1985) argues that raising in Kipsigas, a Nilotic language, is derived by null operator movement. My claim here recent insight into null operators, extends al., 1982). 3. Evidence is that her analysis, incorporating the naturally to Tagalog (cf. Montalbetti et Now let us start looking at evidence that supports the analysis in (5). I adopt an ergative analysis of Tagalog, which is reflected in the glosses of the Tagalog exam- ples (see for instance Maclachlan, 1996; Nakamura, 1996; Maclachlan and Naka- mura, 1997 and references cited there for ergativity of Tagalog). There exists evidence showing that raising in Tagalog involves A™-dependencies. Four kinds of arguments in favor of the present analysis are presented in this section. 3 Contrary to a suggestion made by Ura (19943, who argues that constructions superficially similar to (2b) in other languages involve A-movement. 4 See Chomsky (1995: 261-271) for discussion of feature raising as adjunction to heads. 394 M. Nakamura I Lingua 1 IO (2000) 391-408 3.1. Conditions on raising The first argument has to do with the conditions imposed on raising in Tagalog. As we will see, they are exactly the same as the conditions on w/z-movement in the language (Dell, 1981; Maclachlan, 1996; Nakamura, 1996 among others). Let us begin with canonical cases. Consider (6): (6) Binili ni Juan ang isda. bought(TT) ERG-kin Ass-fish ‚Juan bought the fish.™ (6) exemplifies a transitive sentence in Tagalog, where the verb bears what has been called the Theme Topic marker in the literature. 5 In (6) the Agent Juan receives ergative Case, while the Theme isda ‚fish™ receives absolutive Case. Tagalog, like many other ergative languages, has the condition on w/z-extraction that normally, one can extract an absolutive DP but not other DPs. Thus in Theme Topic constructions like (6), the absolutive Theme DP but not the ergative Agent DP can be extracted, as shown in (7). (7) a. *Sin0 ang binili ang damit? who ANG bought(TT) Ass-dress (‚Who is the one that bought the dress? ‚) b. Ano ang binili ni Juan? what ANG bought(TT) ERG-Juan ‚What is the thing that Juan bought? (7a), where the ergative w&phrase has moved, is ill-formed, whereas (7b), where the absolutive one has, is well-formed. Next, consider (8): (8) Bumili si Juan ng isda. bought(AT) Ass-Juan INH-fish ‚Juan bought fish. (8) exemplifies the Agent Topic construction, where the verb bears the Agent Topic morphology and it is the Agent Juan that receives absolutive Case. Under the analy- sis of Maclachlan and Nakamura (1997), the Theme isda ‚fish™ in (8) is assumed to receive inherent Case within the VP. (8) can be viewed as the antipassive counter- part of (6). The extraction constraint in question says that one can extract the Agent in (8), but not the Theme. That is precisely what we find in (9). 5 See Schachter and Otanes, 1976 for discussion of verbal morphology in Tagalog. See also Guilfoyle et al. (1992), Maclachlan (1996); Maclachlan and Nakamura (1997) on the nature of Tagalog topic mor- phology. M. Nakamural Lingua 110(2000)391-408 395 (9) a. Sino ang bumili ng damit? who ANG bought(aT) INH-dress ‚Who is the one that bought a/the dress?™ b. *Ano ang bumili si Juan? what ANG bought(AT) Ass-Juan (‚What is the thing that Juan bought? ‚) (9a) is fine since it is the absolutive argument that has been w/z-moved. (9b) is ruled out since &-movement has targeted the inherently Case-marked argument. If it is correct to claim that raising in Tagalog is derived by A™-movement, we expect it to obey the same set of constrains that w/z-movement obeys. Observe the following: (10) Nagmukha[-ng nilinis ni Fe ang buong bahay]. appeared(COMP cleaned ERG-Fe Ass-whole house ‚It appeared that Fe cleaned the whole house.™ In (10) the raising verb nagmukha ‚appear™ is used in the matrix clause, but no overt raising has taken place. In the complement clause, the verb nilinis ‚clean™ bears the Theme Topic morpheme, and the Theme buong bahay ‚whole house™ receives abso- lutive Case. Given the above-mentioned extraction constraint, it is expected that the Theme can be raised into the matrix clause but not the Agent. The prediction is borne out, as shown in (11). (11) a. ﬁNagmukha si Fe, [na nilinis ti ang buong hahay]. appeared Ass-Fe COMP cleaned Ass-whole house (Lit. ‚Fe, appeared that ti cleaned the whole house.‚) b. Nagmukha ang buong bahayi [na nilinis ni Fe ti]. appeared Ass-whole house COMP cleaned ERG-Fe Lit. ‚The whole house, appeared that Fe cleaned ti.™ When the verb in the complement clause bears the Agent Topic morphology, as in the case of (12), it is expected that the Agent, not the Theme, should be able to undergo raising. Again, this expectation is fulfilled, as in (13). (12) Nagmumukha[-ng kumain ang bata ng mangga]. appear(AT)-COMP eat(aT) Ass-child IN&mango ‚It appears that the child ate a mango.™ (13) a. Nagmumukha ang batai [ng kumain ti ng mangga]. appear(aT) Ass-child COMP ate(AT) INH-mango Lit. ‚The childi appears that ti ate a mango.™ b. *Nagmumukha ang mangga, [ng kumain ang bata ti], appear(aT) ABS-mango COMP ate(AT) Ass-child (Lit. ‚The mango, appears that the child ate t,.‚) 396 M. Nakamura I Lingua 110(2000)391-408 Interestingly, there are exceptional cases, where non-absolutive DPs can be extracted (see Cena, 1979). Even in those cases, raising should pattern with wh- movement. We will see that that is correct. Let us examine the recent past construction. In this construction, the verb bears the recent past morphology, which indicates that the action in question was carried out in the immediate past. (14) illustrates the construction. (14) Kabibili lang ni Juan ng tela. bUy(RPAST) jUSt ERG-Juan INH-cloth ‚Juan has just bought some/the cloth.™ What is curious about this construction is that it lacks an absolutive DP: in (14) the Agent Juan is marked with ergative Case, while the Theme tela ‚cloth™ is marked with inherent Case. This construction exceptionally allows either argument to be extracted, as shown in (15). (15) a. b. Sino ang kabibili lang ng tela? who ANG bUy(RPAST) just INH-cloth ‚Who is the one that has just bought some/the cloth?™ Ano ang kabibili lang ni Juan? what ANG buy(RPAST) just ERG-JU~~-I ‚What is the thing that Juan has just bought?™ Then, in the present context, we expect that either argument in the recent past construction can undergo raising in sentences like (16). That is indeed the case, as illustrated in (17) (Machlaclan, 1996: 24O).(j (16) Nagmukha[-ng kalilinis lang ni Fe ng buong bahay]. appeared(COMP Clean(RPAST) just ERG-Fe INH-whole house ‚It appeared that Fe has just cleaned a/the whole house.™ (17) a. Nagmukha si Fei [na kalilinis lang ti ng buong bahay]. appeared Ass-Fe COMP clean(RPAsT) just INH-whole house Lit. ‚Fei appeared that ti has just cleaned a/the whole house.™ b. Nagmukha ang buong bahayi [na kalilinis lang ni Fe ri]. appeared Ass-whole house COMP clean(RPAsT) just ERG-Fe Lit. ‚The whole housei appeared that Fe has just cleaned t,.™ Another exceptional case concerns constructions such as comitative and compar- ative ones. An example of the comitative construction is given in (18). 6 Notice that the ‚raised™ argument always receives absolutive Case, regardless of the Case of its asso- ciated null operator in the embedded clause. This is because absolutive Case is the only available struc- tural Case that is not constrained by O-marking: ergative Case and inherent Case are ‚saved™ for external arguments and direct internal arguments respectively (see Nakamura, 1996; Maclachlan and Nakamura, 1997). 397 (18) Kasama ni Juan ang tao. be-with ERG-Juan ABS-man ‚Juan is with the man.™ What is peculiar about this construction is that, as in the case of the recent past con- struction, there is no topic morphology on the verb. But unlike the recent past con- struction, we find an absolutive-marked DP in the comitative construction. Interestingly, we can extract either of the two DPs in (18): the absolutive DP does not block the extraction of the ergative DP. The relevant examples are given in (19). (19) a. Sino ang kasama ang tao? who ANG be-with ABs-man ‚Who is the one that is with the man?™ b. Sino ang kasama ni Juan? who ANG be-with ERG-Juan ‚Who is the one that Juan is with?™ Turning now to raising, we should be able to raise either the absolutive or the ergative DP in the comitative construction embedded under the raising verb, a pre- diction borne out by the following examples (~aclachlan, 1996: 233): (20) Nagmukha[-ng kinaibigan ng kawal ang babae]. appeared(COMP made.friends ERG-soldier ABS-woman ‚It appeared that the soldier made friends with the woman.™ (21) a. Nagmukha ang kawali [na kinaibigan ti ang babae]. appeared Ass-soldier CGMP made.friends ABs-woman Lit. ‚The soldier, appeared that ti made friends with the woman.™ b. Nagmukha ang babaei [na kinaibigan ng kawal ti]. appeared ABS-woman COMP made.friends ERG-soldier Lit. ‚The woman appeared that the soldier made friends with ti*™ (20) is an example with no raising. (21a-b) involve raising; the raising of the erga- tive DP in (21a) and that of the absolutive DP in (21b). They are both well-formed. Data on the comparative construction such as (22) below also show that the pre- sent treatment of raising as a species of A™-movement is on the right track. The con- struction behaves exactly like the comitative construction with respect to wh-move- ment, permitting either of the DPs to be extracted, as illustrated in (23). (22) Kasingtaas ni Juan ang tao. be-as-tall-as ERG-Juan ABS-man ‚Juan is as tall as the man.™ (23) a. Sino ang kasingtaas ang tao? who ANG be-as-tall-as ABS-man ‚Who is the one that is as tall as the man?™ 398 M. Nakamura I Lingua 110 (2000) 391-408 b. Sino ang kasingtaas ni Juan? who ANG be-as-tall-as ERG-Juan ‚Who is the one that Juan is as tall as? ™ As expected, either the absolutive DP nanuy ‚mother™ and the ergative DP 1010 ‚grandfather™ in (24) can be raised into the matrix clause. This is demonstrated by the well-formedness of (25a-b) (see Maclachlan, 1996: 233). (24) Nagmumukha[-ng kasingtaas ng 1010 ang nanay] . appear(AT)-COMP be-as-tall-as ERG-grandfather Ass-mother ‚It appears that grandfather is as tall as mother.™ (25) a. Nagmumukha ang lolo,[-ng kasingtaas ti ang nanay]. appear(AT) Ass-grandfather-COMP be-as-tall-as Ass-mother Lit. ‚Grandfather appears that t, is as tall as mother.™ b. Nagmumukha ang nanay, [na kasingtaas ng 1010 ti]. appear(AT) Ass-mother COMP be-as-tall-as ERG-mother Lit. ‚Motheri appears that grandfather is as tall as ti.™ Let us turn next to the discussion of long-distance dependencies in Tagalog. If raising in Tagalog involves A™-movement, it should be able to apply in a successive- cyclic fashion and obey the same condition that long-distance w/z-extraction obeys. (26) contains examples of the typical biclausal structure in Tagalog. The minimal difference between the two examples lies in the morphology of the matrix verb. In (26a) the matrix verb bears the Theme Topic morpheme. In (26b), on the other hand, it bears the Agent Topic morpheme. In both examples the embedded verb bears the Theme Topic morphology. (26) a. Sinabi ni Pedro na binili ni Linda ang kotse. said(TT) ERG-Pedro COMP bought(TT) ERG-Linda ABS-car ‚Pedro said that Linda bought the car.™ b. Nagsabi si Pedro na binili ni Linda ang kotse. said(AT) Ass-Pedro COMP bought(TT) ERG-Linda ABS-car ‚Pedro said that Linda bought the car.™ Let us see what happens if one tries to &-move the absolutive DP in the embedded clause all the way into the matrix Spec of CP. As shown in (27), in order for the extraction to be successful, the matrix verb must be in the Theme Topic form. (27) a. Ano ang sinabi ni Pedro na binili ni Linda? what ANG said(TT) ERG-Pedro COMP bought(TT) ERG-Linda ‚What is the thing that Pedro said that Linda bought? ™ b. *Ano ang nagsabi si Pedro na binili ni Linda? what ANG said(AT) Ass-Pedro COMP bought(TT) ERG-Linda (‚What is the thing that Pedro said that Linda bought? ‚) We can see that the same constraint is operative in the case of raising. Let us try to raise the absolutive DP in the most deeply embedded clause in (28) into the matrix clause @II, 1981: 27). {ZS) a. b. Gusto ko[-ng makasanayan[-g tulungan siya]]. want lSG.ERG-COMP get.used(LT)-COMP help&T) 3SG.ABS ‚I want to get used to helping him.™ Gusto ko[-ng masanay[-g tulungan siya]]. want lSG.ERG-COMP get.used(AT)-COMP help(LT) 3SG.ABS ‚I want to get used to helping him.™ Note here that the Locative Topic marker, indicated by LT in the gloss, can be regarded as a variant of the Theme Topic marker. Then we should be able to raise the DP in (28a) where the verb in the intermediate clause carries the Locative Topic morphology, but not in (28b), where the co~esponding verb carries the Agent Topic mo~hology. The prediction is borne out by the examples in (29) (Dell, 1981: 27). (29) a. Gusto ko siya,[-ng makasanayan[-g tulungan ti]]. want ~SG.ERG 3sG.~Bs-COMP get.used(LT)-COMP help&T) Lit. ‚I want him, to get used to helping ti.™ b. *Gusto ko SiyaJ-ng masanay[-g tulungan til] * want ISG.ERG 3SG.ABS-COMP get.used(AT)-COOP help(LT) (Lit. ‚I want him, to get used to helping ti.‚) In short, raising in Tagalog applies long-distance in the expected way.7 This is not the place to address the interesting question of how we can account for the extraction constraints in Tagalog. For an analysis, see Sells (1995); Nakamura (1996) and among others.* 3.2. Copy raising The second argument, related to the first one, comes from the distribution of so- called copy raising. The relevant fact is that copy raising is possible only when wh- movement fails. Thus it seems that the pronoun left in copy raising is a resumptive pronoun used to ‚rescue™ A™-dependencies as a last resort (cf. Shlonsky, 1992). Let us consider (30): (30) Gusto ko[-ng lutuin ni Charlie ang suman]. want lSG.ERG-COMP cook(TT) ERG-Charlie Ass-ricecake Lit. ‚I want that Charlie cooks the suman.™ ™ One possible objection would be that the extraction constraint applies to all kinds of movement in Tagalog, not just A™-movement but also A-movement. This objection, however, cannot be on the right track in view of the fact that Tagalog raising licenses parasitic gaps (see below). * The LFG analysis proposed by Sells f 1995) utilizes a condition specific to the Philippine languages. In addition, it cannot expfain the exceptional cases discussed above. Therefore, Nakamura™s (1996) uni- fied analysis based on a universal economy condition is superior. 400 M. Nakamura I Lingua 110 (2000) 391408 (30) represents the canonical case we saw earlier, where only absolutive DP suman ‚rice cake™ can be raised. The ergative DP Charlie cannot be raised, as in (31a) (Kroeger, 1993: 37). (31) a. b. *Gusto ko si Charliei [na lutuin ti ang suman]. want ~SG.ERG Ass-Charlie COMP cook(TT) Ass-rice.cake (Lit. ‚I want Charliei that ti cooks the suman.‚) Gusto ko si Charlie [na lutuin niya ang suman]. Want lSG.ERG Ass-Charlie COMP cook(TT) 3SG.ERG Ass-rice.cake Lit. ‚I want Charlie that he cooks the suman.™ In this case, however, we can ‚save™ (31a) by using the third-person singular pro- noun niya as a last resort, as shown in (31b) (see Kroeger, 1993 for details). So the distribution of copy raising in Tagalog seems to coincide with the general distribution of resumptive pronouns found in A™-dependencies.9 3.3. Parasitic gap The third argument comes from the fact that raising in Tagalog, unlike raising in languages like English, licenses parasitic gaps. As is well-known, licensing of para- sitic gaps is one of the commonly used diagnostics for A™-movement. (32) shows that overt wh-movement and null operator movement both license par- asitic gaps in English (Browning, 1987: 77; see Chomsky, 1982). (32) a. What did John file without reading? b. This spinach is too dirty to eat without washing. Example (33) shows that wh-movement licenses parasitic gaps in Tagalog (Maclachlan, 1996). (33) Ano ang inayos ni Juan na hindi man lang binuksan muna? what ANG repaired ERG-Juan without even open first™ ‚What did Juan repair without even opening first? Example (34) indicates that A-movement cannot license parasitic gaps. 9 In Tagalog, ‚topicalization™, which places a DP in front of the verb, behaves in the same way as rais- ing with respect to the resumptive strategy. Thus, a resumptive pronoun is required in (i) where the non- absolutive DP has been ‚topicalized™ (Kroeger, 1993: 215). (i) Si-Juan, linutu niya ang-pansit. Ass-Juan cooked %G.ERG Ass-noodles ‚Juan, he cooked the noodles.™ Curiously, resumptive pronouns are banned in other A™-dependencies like relativization and clefting. It is beyond the scope of this article to explain the exact distribution of resumptive pronouns in Tagalog. See Kroeger (1993) for a proposal. M. Nakamura I Lingua 1 IO (2000) 391-408 401 (34) *The article appears to have been filed without reading. In sharp contrast to the raising example in (34), Tagalog (35) is well-formed, where the raising of relos ‚watch™ licenses the parasitic gap in the adjunct clause (~aclachl~, 1996). (35) Nagmumukha ang relosi [na aayusin t,] na hindi man lang buksan muna. appear watch COMP repaired without even open first Lit. ‚The watch appears to have been repaired without even opening first.™ Thus (35) counts as solid evidence for the A™-nature of raising in Tagalog. 3.4. Raising predicates The fourth argument is related to the range of predicates that allow raising. Under the present analysis where raising in Tagalog is taken to be a variant of u&-move- ment, it is predicted that Tagalog should permit raising with a wider range of predi- cates than English. In English, raising is highly constrained by the lexical character- istics of matrix predicates (see™Posta1, 1974). In Tagalog, where raising uses the general strategy of ~~-movement, raising should be possible as long as (i) the embedded clause allows w/z-movement, and (ii) the DP base-generated in a non-@ position in the matrix clause can receive Case. The prediction is borne out; raising is possible with a wide range of predicates including, for example, verbs such as ‚avoid™ and ‚strive™, as shown in (36) and (37) (Dell, 19X1), and modal predicates such as ‚can™, as shown in (38) (cf. Kroeger, 1993: 213). (36) a. Iniwasan niya[-ng lapitan akO]. avoided ~SG.ERG-COMP approach(LT) lsG.~Bs ‚He avoided approaching me.™ b. Iniwasan niya akoi[-ng lapitan ti]. avoided ~SG.ERG ~SG.ABS-COMP approach(LT) ‚He avoided approaching me.™ (37) a. Pinilit ko[-ng tulungan sila]. strived(TT) lSG.ERG-COMP help(LT) 3PL.ABS ‚I did my best to help them.™ b. Pinilit ko sila,[-ng tulungan ti]* strived(TT) ~SG.ERG 3PL.ABS-COMP help&T) ‚I did my best to help them.™ (38) ~aaa~~uwede~epat si Miguel, [na magbasa Ei ng diyario]. can can should Ass-Miguel COMP read(AT) INri-newspaper ‚Miguel can/can/should read a newspaper.™ The wide range of raising possibilities is expected under the present account. To wrap up this section, I have presented four kinds of evidence in favor of the present null operator analysis. The data reviewed above can be explained in a uni- 402 M. Nakamura I Lingua 110 (2000) 391408 fied way under the present analysis where Tagalog raising is derived by A™-move- ment. 4. Parametric variation Having defended the present analysis, I now turn to the second question raised at the outset, that is, the question of what is responsible for the parametric differences between English and Tagalog in terms of raising. Recall that the Tagalog raising in (2b) is analyzed as involving feature movement of a null operator, as shown in (39). (39) [appear the child [cp FF [OP$ [ate [DP $0~11 mango111 (= 5 = 2b) It is important to realize that the well-formedness of (39) contrasts sharply with the ill-formedness of English (4Obc). (40) a. John is easy Ccp FF,,,,-C [PRO to please [or troP1]]]. b. *John is easy [cp FF,o,,-C [PRO to believe [uP t,,,,] to have kissed Mary]]. c. *John is easy [cp FF,,,,- C [PRO to believe [Mary kissed [or tloPl]]]]. In order for movement of a null operator to be legitimate, it must satisfy two con- ditions simultaneously (cf. Stowell, 1986). First, it must take place out of a properly governed position. (40b) is ill-formed since the null operator movement is out of the subject DP, which is not properly governed in English (Takahashi, 1997) due to the lexical characteristics of T(ense); T in the language has a strong D-feature (trigger- ing the EPP effect) and a weak V-feature (triggering no overt verb movement to T) (Chomsky, 1995). Second, null operator movement must take place in a non-tensed clause. (40~) is ungrammatical since the null operator originates from a tensed clause. (40a) is well-formed because the two conditions are met. Note that the following examples of category movement contrast with (4Ob-c). (41) a. Who do you believe to have kissed Mary? b. Who do you believe Mary kissed? In (41a) the ECM subject &-phrase has been extracted. In (41b) the &z-phrase has been extracted out of a tensed clause. Let us assume following Takahashi (1997) that feature raising, just like category raising, is subject to Huang™s (1982) Condition on Extraction Domain (see also Chomsky, 1981; Lasnik and Saito, 1984).rﬂ (42) Condition on Extraction Domain (CED): An element E may be extracted out of a domain D only if D is properly gov- erned. ﬂ Huang (1982) originally formulated the CED as a condition on category movement. M. Nakamura I Lingua I1 0 (2000) 391-408 403 For present purposes, we can assume something like the minimalist restatement of proper government mentioned in Homstein (1995: 201), given in (43) (adapted from Homstein, 1995: 201).ﬂ (43) An element E is properly governed iff it is in the complement domain of some X0 chain. Then the ungrammaticality of (41b) as well as that of (44) is explained by the CED. (44) a. ﬁWhoi did YOU believe [[or a picture of ti] was on sale] ? b. ﬁWhOi did you believe [[or a picture of t,] to be on sale]? The grammaticality of (41a) is due to the fact that no CED violation is incurred: the entire category of the subject, not just its features, has been raised. I will not offer an account of the tense condition here. Suffice it to say that descriptively, the presence of tense seems to block null operator feature movement somehow, as the contrast between (40~) and (41b) indicates.i2 Going back to Tagalog, the grammaticality of (39) suggests that both conditions at issue are satisfied. Note that the null operator movement is out of the thematic subject and it takes place within the seemingly tensed clause. First, as shown in (44), it is possible to extract out of the subject in Tagalog, demonstrating that the subject position is properly governed. (45) Sinai ang bumili [ang nanay ti] ng kotse? who ANG bought Ass-mother INH-car Lit. ‚Whose, did [ti mother] buy a car?™ Let us compare English (46) and Tagalog (47). Their structures at Spell-Out are assumed to be as in (48) (see Bowers, 1993 for Predicate Phrase, which, as in the case of Chomsky™s 1995 ‚light™ verb phrase, accommodates external arguments). (46) John bought the fish. (47) a. Binili ni Juan ang isda. (= 6) bought(TT) ERG-Juan Ass-fish ‚Juan bought the fish.™ t™ The relevant definitions from Chomsky (1995: 178) are given below: (i) a. The complement domain of a is the subset of the domain reflexively dominated by the com- plement of a. b. The domain of a is the set of nodes contained in Max(a) that are distinct from and do not con- tain a. c. Max(a) is the least full-category maximal projection dominating a. ‚* The following derivations involving null operator movement are excluded: (i) a. *The child appears [cP FF tort-C [[nr t,op,] likes chocolate]]. b. *Chocolate appears [,-r FF,,,t-C [the child likes [or floPI]]], (ia) is excluded by the CED. (ib), which satisfies the CED, is ruled out by the tense condition, 404 M. Nakamura I Lingua 110 (2000) 391408 b. (48) a. Bumili si Juan ng isda. bought(AT) Ass-Juan INN-fish ‚Juan bought fish.™ b. (= 8) AsplP DP Asp1 PrP I I A Johni T PrP bought DP I A DP I /X Juan Pr Asp2P ti Pr AspP Asp2 I A A bought DP Asp™ V DP I A I the fish, Asp A (the) fish V DP I 5 Let us assume following Travis (1991) that there exists a functional category Aspect right above VP, as shown in (48a). Koizumi (1993), extending Johnson™s (1991) analysis, has proposed a similar analysis for English and other languages, where the functional category above VP is taken to be Object Agreement or AgrO. His arguments are based on such things as the distribution of floated quantifiers, Rel- ativized Minimality (Rizzi, 1990), participle agreement, and Chain Condition (Rizzi, 1986) (see Koizumi, 1993 for details). If Chomsky (1995) is correct in saying that Universal Grammar should dispense with Agr with no semantic content, then the functional category that Koizumi identified is most likely interpretable, as in the case of Travis™s Asp. Let us assume further, again following Travis (1991), that as illustrated in (48b), Tagalog has two aspectual functional categories, one with a narrow scope (dubbed ‚Asp2™), the other with a wide scope (dubbed ‚Aspl™) (see below). Travis (1991) presents empirical and theoretical arguments for the kind of struc- ture given in (48). Her empirical arguments are based on (i) word order facts in Kalagan, another Austronesian language spoken in parts of Mindanao, and (ii) Taga- log verbal morphology. Consider the following Kalagan examples, where the topic DP appears in bold face (Collins, 1970): (49) a. Kumamang aku sa tubig na lata kan Ma™ adti balkon get(AT) 1 the water with the can for Father on the porch na lunis. on Monday M. Nakamuru i Lingua 110 (BOO) 391-408 405 Kamangin aku ya tubig na lata kan Ma™ adti balkon na get(TT) I the water with the can for Father on the porch on iunis. Monday 
Pagkamang aku ya lata sa tubig kan Ma™ adti balkon na lunis. get(IT) I the can the water for Father on the porch on Monday Kamangan aku ya Ma™ sa tubig na lata adti balkon na lunis. get(RT) I Father the water with the can on the porch on Monday ‚I will get the water with the can for Dad on the porch on Monday.™ Unlike Tagafog, which permits different word orders due to scrambling {Richards, 1993) (and hence is uninfo~ative with regard to the landing site of NP-movement), Kalagan has a rigid rule for its word order. (49a) and (49b) exemplify the basic word order in Kalagan, that is, Verb-Agent-Theme-Instmment-Benefactive-Locative- Temporal. Of great interest is the fact that in examples like (49c-d), the topic DP moves into a designated position between the Agent and the Theme. If we assume that the non-moved elements, the Agent and the Theme in particular, are in their base-generated positions, it follows that the landing site for derived objects lies between PrP and VP. Tagalog verbal morphology provides a key to understanding the nature of this projection. As has been pointed out in the literature, temporal relations in Taga- log are expressed in terms of different combinations of aspects (thus, English glosses for Tagalog verbs are only misleading} (Schachter and Otanes, 1976). As summarized in (50), basically, Tagalog has three aspects, perfective, imperfec- tive, and contemplated (see Schachter and Otanes, 1976; Kroeger, 1993 among others). (50) [+begun] (-in-) [-begun1 (0) [+complete] (0) Perfective *(Basic form) ~.. [-complete] (reduplication) Imperfective Contemplated An example of a verb inflected for these three aspects is given in (51). (51) Basic form Perfective Imperfective Contemplated b&y-an ‚give@@ b-in-igy-a~ b-iiz-i-bigy-in bi-bigy-an Travis (199 1) notes that in Tagalog, the Pr head, which introduces a ‚causer™ into phrase structure, is morphologically spelled out as pag- in certain instances. As shown, for example, in (52), the [-complete] aspectual morpheme (that is, the redu- plicative morpheme) appears between pag- and the root verb. (52) n-m-pag-RED-tumba (nagtutumba) Asp 1 -m-Pr-Asp2-V ‚was knocking down™ 406 M. Nakamu~al~in~~~a 110 (2000)39I~O8 Assuming that the order of morphemes in the verbal complex reflects the hiecar- chical order of heads present in the clause, we can maintain that the projection tar- geted by the ‚derived object™ is headed by a species of aspect. In addition, there must be a higher aspectual functional projection above Pr, as depicted in (49b). Under Travis™s analysis, Asp1 hosts the features [&begun] and Asp2 the features [*complete]. Travis mentions three conceptual advantages of her analysis. First, the parallel between dative shift and passive discussed by Larson (1988) can fully be captured; both involve movement of a Caseless argument into the specifier position of a func- tional category. Second, the analysis, where derived objects appear in the specifier of Aspect (Asp2 in Tagalog-type languages), opens up a way to explain the widely observed ~o~elations between aspect and direct objects in terms of such things as perfectivity, affectedness, and specificity. Third, the positioning of the functional category Aspect (or Asp2) allows us to come to grips with certain scope facts in structural terms; since the functional category, unlike Tense, has scope only over VP (see Travis, 1991 for details). Having motivated the structures in (48), let us consider the issue of variation in proper government. As already mentioned, Spec of TP is not properly governed in English. Thus, John in (48a) is not properly governed. In Tagalog (48b), the the- matic subject Juan is properly governed, because (i) the subject remains within the VP and (ii) the verb raises overtly up to Aspl, driving the verb-initial word order (see Guilfoyle et al., 1992; Richards, 1993; Maclachlan and Nakamura, 1997). This means that Asp1 in Tagalog has a weak D-feature and a strong V-feature. Then the gross-linguistic difference in terms of the Subject Condition can be attributed to the difference in tense/aspect features. How about the tense condition? The answer is straightforward. As mentioned above, Tagalog does not have a tense system at all. This means that the tense condi- tion on null operator movement applies only vacuously in Tagalog, allowing a wider range of null operator constructions in the language than in languages like English. In brief, the differences between English and Tagalog regarding null operator movement are reducible to the differences in the nature of tense/aspect between the two languages. 5. Summary To recapitulate the present answers to the questions in (3), it has been argued that: - Tagalog ‚raising™ in (2b) involves A™-movement of a null operator, which is fea- ture movement, and the base-generation of the ‚raised™ DP in the matrix clause. - The cross-linguistic ‚raising™ differences between English and Tagalog stem solely from their lexical differences in terms of tense/aspect. Let us briefly consider the implications of the present analysis. To the extent that it is correct, it implies that: M. ~uka~~~ru / Lingua f IO (2000) 391-408 407 - Null operator movement is feature movement, subject to the CED, as argued by Takahashi (1997). Without the feature raising analysis, the correlation between null operator movement and proper government would be missed. More gener- ally, this supports the minimalist feature-driven theory of tr~sfo~ation. - The principles-and-parameters view on parameterization gains support, where it is claimed that parametric differences derive from morphological differences. It remains to be seen whether the account put forth here extends to other ‚exotic™ raising constructions found in natural language, but that is a topic for future work. References Bowers, J., 1993. The syntax of predication. Linguistic Inquiry 24. 591-656. Browning. M., 1987. Null operator constructions. Doctoral disse~ation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Cena, R., 1979. Tagalog counterexamples to the accessibility hierarchy. Studies in Philippine Linguistics 31, 119-124. Chomsky, N., 1981. Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris. Chomsky, N., 1982. Some concepts and consequences of the theory of government and binding. Cam- bridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Collins, G., 1970. Two views of Kalagan grammar. Doctoral dissertation, Indiana University, Bloom- ington, IN. Dell, F., 1981. On certain sentential complements in Tagalog. Philippine Journal of Linguistics 12, 1 l-28. Guilfoyle, E., H. Hung and L. Travis, 1992. SPEC of IP and SPEC of VP: Two subjects in Austronesian languages. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory IO, 375-414. Hornstein, N., 1995. Logical form: From GB to minimalism. Oxford: Blackwell. Huang, C.-T.J., 1982. Logical relations in Chinese and the theory of gmmmar. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Johnson, K., 1991. Object positions. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 9, 577-636. Koizumi, M., 1993. Object agreement phrases and the split VP hypothesis. MIT Working Papers in Lin- guistics 18, 99-148. Kroeger, P.R., 1993. Phrase structure and grammatical relations in Tagalog. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publi- cations. Larson, R., 1988. On the double object construction. Linguistic Inquiry 19, 335-391. Lasnik, H. and M. Saito, 1984. On the nature of proper government. Linguistic Inquiry 15, 235-289. Maclachlan, A., 1996. Aspects of egativity in Tagalog. Doctoral dissertation, McGill University, Mon- treal. Maclachlan, A. and M. Nakamura., 1997. Case-checking and specificity in Tagalog. The Linguistic Review 14, 307-333. Massam, D., 1985. Case theory and the projection principle. Doctoral dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Montalbetti, M., M. Saito and L. Travis., 1982. Three ways to get tough. Papers from the Eighteenth Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society, 348-366. Nakamura, M., 1996. Economy of chain formation. Doctoral dissertation, McGill University, Montreal. Postal, P., 1974. On raising. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Richards. N., 1993. Tagalog and the typology of scrambling. Honors thesis, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY. Rizzi, L., 1986. On chain fo~ation. In: H. Borer (ed.), The syntax of pronominal clitics (Syntax and Semantics 19), 65-95. New York: Academic Press. 408 M.NakamuraiLingua 110(2000)391~08 Rizzi, L., 1990. Relativized minimality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Schachter, P. and F.T. Otanes, 1976. Tagalog reference grammar. Berkeley, CA: University of Califor- nia Press. Sells, P., 1995. Raising and the order of clausal constituents in the Philippine languages. Paper presented at the Second Annual Meeting of the Austronesian Formal Linguistics Association, McGill Univer- sity, Montreal. Shlonsky, U., 1992. Resumptive pronouns as a last resort. Linguistic Inquiry 23, 443468. Stowell, T., 1986. Null antecedents and proper government. Proceedings of NELS 16, 476493. Takahashi, D., 1997. Move-F and null operator movement. The Linguistic Review 14, 181-196. Travis, L., 1991. Derived objects, inner aspect and the structure of VP. Paper presented at NELS 22, University of Delaware, Newark, DE. Ura, H., 1994. Varieties of raising and the feature-based bare phrase structure theory. MIT Occasional Papers in Linguistics 7. Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, MIT, Cambridge, MA. 