ELSEVIER Lingua 112 (2002) 121-126 www.elsevier.com/Iocateningua Book review G. Chierchia and S. McConnell-Ginet, Meaning and grammar. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2000. 573 pp. 523.50. Reviewed by Alessandro Capone, Dipartimento di Filologia e Linguistica, Facolta di Lettere e Filosofia, University of Messina, Italy. E-mail: sandro.capone@tin.it Meaning and grammar introduces the reader to complicated issues such as quan- tification and logical form, Gricean pragmatics and speech act theory, intensionality, indexicality, discourse and presupposition, Lambda abstraction and word meaning. This is a very useful tool for teaching semantics in the classroom and I assume that this book is aimed at graduate, rather than undergraduate, students, given the com- plexity of the formalisms involved. The various issues are presented in a gradual way, SO as to make sure that each chapter is a step forward in the understanding of more complicated materials. Although Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet (hencefor- ward: C&M) use the term semantics in a broad way to cover both semantics and pragmatics, they have some chapters for pragmatics proper which are interspersed in the text and thus provide a more balanced perspective on linguistic meaning. Although I believe that the authors place a greater emphasis on semantics, the chap- ters on pragmatics strike the reader for their conceptual clarity, in that they present some notions such as locutionary/illocutionary/perlocutionary act or speaker™s mean- ing, which are intrinsically obscure, and make them intelligible to the ordinary student. I am also persuaded that C&M provide a correct interpretation of Austin™s and Grice™s notions and that professional scholars might benefit from it. I was struck by the careful way in which C&M systematically compare the frag- ments of ordinary English with their translations into formalism. This method is par- ticularly useful for students in that, by combining semantic and syntactic informa- tion, the authors throw light on the combinatorial mechanisms of the language. It is true that sometimes the procedure is a bit tedious and perhaps the reader is provided with an excessive dose of formalism, but it is the task of the teacher to explain the details of the formalism in the classroom. The strength of the book is to combine syntactic and semantic analysis and to provide syntactic trees in which each node is labelled with a number corresponding to a semantic compositional operation speci- fied in a separate text that follows the diagram. The compositional method works by combining semantic with syntactic information following the hierarchical structures of the syntactic tree. The book is also equipped with exercises which induce the 037%2166/02/$ - see front matter 0 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00054-1 122 Book review, I Lingua I12 (2002) 121-126 student to acquire the habit of translating fragments of English into formalism but also induce the habit of thinking of problems, problem-solving being a powerful pedagogical resource. Although the prose is somewhat dry and magisterial, the intel- lectual rewards provided by the authors are so great that they lead the students to work hard from each step to the subsequent one in the understanding of the issues discussed. C&M view meaning as having an informational dimension, in other words they take the meaning of sentences their ability to inform us about situations (that are real in the external and internal world) (pp. 12-16, 72). This is what they call the ahout- news of language. Of course, they do not undervalue the cognitive significance of language and they find the view of meaning as the study of the mental representa- tions triggered by sentences quite plausible. They think that both views should inter- sect, although, ultimately, they embrace Tarski™s view of meaning and propound a theory of semantics based on truth. C&M offer us a theory of meaning that is essentially compositional, that is, mean- ings are computed by combining the information contained in lexical entries with grammatical relations. C&M consider the meanings of connectives as functions taking as input truth values and providing as output truth values. I will not rehearse their considerations on connectives fully since these can be obtained from any logi- cal textbook, but I want to point out their habit of using a special notation in which the value T(rue) is equated with the numerical value 1 and the value false is equated with the numerical value 0. The truth conditions of the connectives are the standard ones. Presumably by fol- lowing Levinson (1983) and the pragmatic tradition, the meaning of 01™ is expressed by the truth conditions associated with inclusive disjunction, which, in this view, is entailed by exclusive disjunction. Relations such as entailments are represented by circles embedding other circles. The inner circle is associated with the entailing expression. C&M on p. 81 spell out in detail how the truth conditions of a sentences such as Pab™arotti is hungry and it is not the case that Bond likes Pavarotti are cal- culated compositionally from the bottom up. I will not go through the whole process but I must notice that in this view the denotation of predicates such as is hungry is represented in set theoretic terms: (x: x is hungry in v) = the set of things such that they are hungry in v. A simple sentence such as Pavarotti is hungrv is represented as: (I ) Pavarotti E (x: x is hungry in v) (Pavarotti is a member of the set of things that are hungry in v) What C&M basically do is to construct a syntactic tree and, by using the truth-con- ditional import of connectives and the truth conditions of simple sentences obtained by functional application (by combining subjects with predicates), they calculate the global truth conditions. Their procedure is a bit tedious but once certain notational facts are clear to the reader, the advantages of this procedure are evident, since it can be applied to all expressions of the language. C&M use a special notation for com- plex predicates such as likes Bond. This predicate expresses the set of ordered pairs Book review I Lingua II2 (2002) 121-126 123 such that the first element of the pair likes the second. The denotation of likes Bond can be expressed by this notation: [(x, y): x likes y)]. The chapter on quantifiers and logical form is certainly a very detailed introduc- tion to quantification theory. Quantifiers, according to C&M, introduce the power to move beyond talk about properties of particular individuals to saying what quantity of the individuals in a given domain have a given property. They deal with the core of quantificational expressions by using the language of (first order) predicate calcu- lus (for other quantifiers like most this is not sufficient). According to C&M each quantificational sentence can be thought of as having two components: one is a sim- ple subject-predicate sentence with something like a pronominal as its subject (a variable); the other component is the quantified expression that tells us how many different values of the pronoun we have to consider. C&M use model theory in order to deal with quantified expressions. Although the terminology might discourage stu- dents who approach the subject for the first time, it has the merit of explaining pre- cisely how quantification works. I will explain the method used below. Consider: (2) [[V xn A]] M , gl = 1 iff for all u E U, [[All M I. g I luix nl = 1 This says that the expression V xn A relative to a model Ml and to an assignment function gl is true iff for all values u assigned by the assignment function gl to the variable x, A is true in Ml. Thus, if A is Happy (x), the expression ‚if xn A is true if, taking any value u of the domain and replacing x with it, the expression Happy (x) is true. C&M explore the issue of quantification both with reference to model theory and to the binding theory. They deal with the different relative scopes of quantifiers in terms of Quantifier Raising, a fruitful framework, and successively prove the paral- lels between constraints on syntactic movement (Wh-movement is subject to island constraints) and on Quantifier Raising (pp. 173-174). After an interesting demon- stration that the indefinite article in the context of donkey-sentences must be dealt with like a universal quantifier (p. 179, C&M show, on the basis of the Binding Theory, that a quantifier can bind a variable (or fails to bind a variable) subject to the constraints of the Binding Theory (e.g. pronominals must be free in the local domain, reflexives must be bound in the local domain). On pp. 185-186 C&M point to some problems of the Binding Theory, namely the fact that phrases having differ- ent indices could accidentally refer to the same individual. C&M use pragmatic con- siderations by Reinhart to show how, despite this problem, one obtains the default interpretation that a pronominal is free in the local domain. C&M have a chapter on ‚Speaking, meaning, and doing™. This chapter explains with great clarity Grice™s pragmatic program (speaker™s meaning, meaning based on intentionality, applied timeless meaning), attributive/referential uses of NPs, Lewis™ notion of convention, indirect speech acts, the basics of discourse dynamics, seman- tic reductions of speech acts, Austin™s and Searle™s considerations on speech acts, felicity conditions and conversational implicature. Surprisingly, C&M, apart from a hasty reference to Levinson (2000), do not outline recent pragmatic advances in the field of anaphora. 124 Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 121-126 The discussion of quantifiers such as SOtire and of disjunction (or) favours the notion of generalised implicature, which, according to C&M, compares favourably with the alternative notion of lexical ambiguity. The lack in other languages of pairs of lexemes in place of the English single lexeme is taken as evidence in favour of the pragmatic view. C&M attempt to prove that disjunction is unambiguous in that inclusive disjunction can only be translated by Neither nor. C&M also consider the fact that in Latin the word aulenz is used to express only inclusive disjunction, but then they dismiss it as evidence in favour of the ambiguity as auten? was only used in contexts where inclusive disjunction was meant. The chapter on intensionality is perhaps one of the most interesting. This makes use of the notion of possible worlds. After the standard analysis of possibility and necessity, and of conditionals, C&M move on to the analysis of tense as a functional category and in terms of TR (Tense Raising). Interactions with quantifiers are also considered and TR is used to obtain scope distinctions and simultaneous vs non- simultaneous readings (with the universal quantifier). Negation Raising is also used to obtain the right interactions with tense, although the authors stipulate that negation must have scope over tense to avoid what they consider undesirable consequences (p. 291). They also introduce Reichenbach™s very useful notion of reference time to deal with complex tenses and with problematic sentences such as Job/r did/? ‚t turn off the stove (pp. 292-293). C&M also analyse complementation and define X believes that p (p. 304) in terms of possible worlds. By scope distinctions, they analyse the usual de re and de ditto effects. The section on infinitives and gerunds is very interesting, as, by resorting to the analysis of gerunds as predicates, they avoid the fallacy of arguments such as: a. Pavarotti tried playing tennis; b. Loren tried the thing that Pavarotti tried; c. Loren tried Pavarotti played tennis. If the predicative view is adopted, then one obtains inferences such as: try (L, *x: play tennis (x)) (p. 316). In the chapter on Contexts, C&M consider the problem of indexicality and pro- pose the (now standard) idea that indexicals have to be assigned truth conditions by reference to some contextual parameters. On p. 339, C&M analyse some problems for the contextual parameter approach to deixis. They consider that it is not enough to replace in a sentence such as (3) ‚I™ with ‚the speaker™, thus obtaining (4): (3) I am hungry (4) The speaker is hungry. In fact, by this method one has problems with the following sentence (5), which would have to be equivalent to (6): (5) If I were not the speaker, Joan would be talking. (6) If the speaker were not the speaker, Joan would be talking Analogously, the following sentence would have to be necessarily true: (7) If the present speaker were now silent, there would be no present speaker, and thus I would not exist. Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 121-126 125 Of course, C&M must be right in making the point that the right truth conditions of indexical statements containing pronominals are not obtained by first replacing the pronominal with the contextual parameter (e.g. the present speaker). Replace- ment of the pronominal with a synonymous expression is not required, but one keeps in mind that the pronominal must be understood with reference to a contextual par- ameter, say, the speaker, and then searches for the value of the speaker relative to the context of utterance and replaces that value into the pronominal. The considerations on presupposition are more interesting. C&M define presuppo- sitions in this way: ﬁPresuppositions of S must be satisfied by a context c in order for S to be assertible, for an utterance of S to be felicitousﬂ. According to C&M the main empirical characteristics of presuppositions are: being backgrounded and being taken for granted. The hallmark of a presupposition is that it is taken for granted in the sense that its assumed truth is a precondition for felicitous utterance of the sentence and places a constraint on the discourse contexts that admit the sentence for in- terpretation (p. 352). According to C&M presuppositions are associated with the follow- ing family of sentences: S, It is not the case that S, Is it the case that S?, If S, then S™. In their section on Dynamic sentential semantics and presupposition, C&M con- sider sentences as functions from contexts to contexts. These functions are called context change potentials. On p. 371, they define presupposition formally: (8) Let S be an atomic sentence not containing connectives or modals. Let In& (S) (the intension of S relative to c and g) be [ <w™,i™>: [[S]] M,g,w.,c = 11. We then stipulate that ISI,,c (c*) = c* n In& (S) if c* Vc p for any p that S presupposes. If for some p that S presupposes, c Q p, ISI,,c (c*) is undefined. From this definition, it follows that if a speaker were to utter the sentence It was the butler that killed Kermit in a context in which it is known that Kermit was killed either by the butler or by Ms. Piggy, then the context change potential of the sen- tence would be defined (the sentence is admitted in that context as its presupposition is satisfied). C&M analyse the projection problem for presupposition with respect to negation and conjunction (the projection problem for conditionals and disjunctions being a consequence of the projection rules for conjunction). As far as negation is con- cerned, C&M propose that one should subtract from c* the worlds in which S is true. This happens in the following way. First one computes ISI (c*) (as if S were asserted in context c). Then one takes the complement of the result with respect to the orig- inal context set. As far as conjunctions are concerned, the presuppositions are projected according to this rule: (9) c* + [S and S™] = [[c* + S] + S™] Thus consider the sentence (10): (10) John went to Paris and he regrets that [he went to Paris]. 126 Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 121-126 Following the method exposed in C&M, one clearly sees that the presupposition of S™ is satisfied (entailed) by the prior context and, thus, does not ascend to become a presupposition of the whole sentence. On p. 377, C&M show how the joint entail- ments of C* and S (c*) satisfy the presupposition of a following sentence which is thus not projected. I think that C&M ought to have explained how the story works for conditionals and disjunctions. For conditionals, the same projection rule as above is used (c* + [if S, S™] = [[c* + S] + S™]]. The rationale for this is that a conditional is understood as: In all worlds in which p is true, y is also true. One who utters this sentence must ensure that the presuppositions of p are satisfied by the previous context and that the presuppositions of q are satisfied by c* + p. In fact, if I say, If John is happy, his children must be happy, the presupposition of S™ (John has children), must be satis- fied by c* + John is happy. If it were not satisfied, it would be useless to utter the conditional. As disjunction can be derived due to logical equivalence from con- ditionals (p or q @ If - p, q), it can be dealt with in terms of conditionals. All this ought to be said, because otherwise the dynamic framework looks some- what mysterious. I think that C&M also ought to have considered the alleged prob- lems for the dynamic semantics approach (also known as ﬁlocal context satisfaction approachﬂ) raised by van der Sandt (1992). It is possible that a mixed approach might ultimately be more satisfactory, local satisfaction being reserved for negation and conjunction, binding being more appropriate to conditionals and disjunctions. Summing up, I believe that this book will be one of the foundation stones of mod- ern linguistics, one which no modern linguist can afford to miss, as it promises to illuminate the paths of our linguistic investigations and to offer us, in a world where competing and often misleading theories claim our allegiances, such an enduring guidance that will certainly prevent us from going astray. I do not know whether this book will make Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet rich and famous as is their wish (in their preface). What I know is that they really deserve the object of their hopes. References Levinson, S., 2000. Presumptive meanings. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. van der Sandt, R., 1992. Presupposition projection as anaphora resolution. Journal of Semantics 9, 333-377. 