ELSEVIER Lingua llO(2001) 127-133 www.elsevier.com/Iocate/lingua Book reviewb Zeljko Boskovic, The syntax of nonfinite complementation: An economy approach (Linguistic Inquiry Monograph 32). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997. xii + 247 pp. g42.50 (hardback). ISBN o-262-02429-2. Reviewed by Chris Collins, Departent of Linguistics, Morrill Hall, Cornell Uni- versity, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. E-mail: cc42Qcomell.edu This book, based on Boskovic™s (henceforward: B) (1995) thesis, represents one of the first attempts to systematically apply Minimalism and economy conditions to a large and complex body of data, namely, the distribution of infinitival comp- lements and participle movement. The book is filled with interesting data, insightful criticisms of various proposals, and plausible analyses. Therefore, I would recom- mend it to anybody interested in the syntax of infinitival and participial comp- lements. The economy conditions explored by B are Last Resort, Greed, Enlightened Self- Interest, the Minimal Structure Principle (MSP), a condition on the length of chain links (p. 27), Minimize Chain Links, Procrastinate and a condition that movement carry as little material as possible (p. 154). B weaves together these economy con- ditions in the analysis of ECM, control, raising and participle movement. The book consists of five chapters. The first chapter is a general introduction. The second chapter, ‚Selection and the categorial status of infinitives™ is devoted to a Minimalist analysis of the distribution of PRO. The third chapter ‚Wager-class verbs and French propositional infinitives ™ is devoted to ECM constructions involving verbs like wager and ECM constructions involving the French verb croire ‚believe™. The fourth chapter ‚Existential constructions, A-movement and infinitival comp- lementation™ investigates the implications of infinitival constructions for the analysis of expletive constructions. The fifth chapter ‚Participle movement™ is devoted to par- ticiple movement in Serbo-Croatian and related constructions (e.g., verbal clusters in Dutch). Chapters two through four are closely related to each other. Chapter five, on the other hand, could be easily read apart from the other chapters. In Chapter 1, B analyzes the distribution of PRO. In particular, B™s analysis does not make use the concept of government, which was a cornerstone of the GB ™ I would like to thank Dorit Abusch, Mark Baltin and John Bowers for helpful discussions. 037%2166/02/$ - see front matter 0 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-384 I (00)00055-3 approach to such data. Consider the following classical paradigm distinguishing ECM and subject control verbs. (1) a. John believed [him to be crazy] b. *John believed [PRO to be crazy] (2) a. John tried [PRO to win] b. *John tried [him to win] The GB analysis of this paradigm goes roughly as follows. In (la,b), since the verb belie\ve c-selects an IP complement (S-bar deletion), it can govern and assign accusative Case to the NP him, which is the subject of the infinitival clause. Simi- larly, PRO cannot appear as the subject of the complement IP, since it would be governed. In (2a,b), since the verb try c-selects a CP complement, it cannot govern and assign accusative Case to the NP him, which is the subject of the infinitival clause. Similarly, PRO can appear as the subject of the complement IP, since it is not governed. B™s analysis of the paradigm in (1) and (2) goes as follows. First B adopts the claim of Chomsky and Lasnik (1993) that PRO needs to be assigned null Case. Sec- ond, B proposes that try s-selects an Irrealis complement. Semantically, the defining property of Irrealis complements is that ﬁthey denote a possible future . . . they specify a time frame that is unrealized with respect to the Tense of the matrix clause.ﬂ (p. 11). Syntactically, the Irrealis complement is headed by a [+tense, -finite] Infl. B furthermore suggests that belicvr s-selects a Proposition complement (which is distinct from an Irrealis complement). As a consequence, the infinitival complement of believe is not headed by a [+tense, -finite] Infl. Lastly, B claims that only a [+tense, -finite] Infl can assign null Case to its specifier (see Martin, 1996). Given these assumptions, the paradigm in (1) and (2) follows. In (2a), [+tense, -finite] Infl assigns null Case, so PRO is acceptable. Since the NP him cannot get null Case, (2b) is unacceptable. In (I b), [-tense, -finite] Infl does not assign null Case, so PRO is unacceptable. However, in (1 a) lrinr can be assigned accusative by the matrix verb (through overt raising). The advantage of B™s approach is that it does not make use of government or c-selection. B takes as one of the goals of his book to show how the notion of c-selection is not needed in the account of infinitival complements. B suggests that c-selection could be altogether eliminated from the theory of grammar (p. 9). One complication is that there are many ECM verbs that take a future-oriented infinitival complement: unticipate, expect, forecast, intend. meun, plan. predict, and prqject (see Abusch, 2000, for a detailed discussion). Some of these verbs are of the class of W-verbs (want type verbs, see Postal, 1974: 176). These include: expect, intend, mean, plan. The others, however, seem to be of the class of B-verbs (belielIe type verbs). These incude: anticipate, forecast, predict and project. Unlike W-verbs, these later verbs do not take control complements, and do not seem particularly felicitous with for-complements. Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 127-133 129 (3) a. *I predicted to win (vs. I wanted to win) b. ??What I predicted was for John to win. (vs. What I wanted was for John to win.) Now consider the following example: (4) A volcanic eruption is predicted to occur in Oregon this coming summer The verb predict is an ECM verb, but the infinitival complement has a possible future interpretation: the possible eruption times follow the utterance time. Given B™s theory, we might want to postulate that the Infl embedded under predict is [+tense, -finite]. However, as seen in (3), PRO is not possible as the subject of the embedded infinitival clause. This type of example then seems to be a counter-exam- ple to the B™s theory, which predicts that PRO should be possible with future oriented infinitivals (see Martin, 1996: 101 for a similar issue that arises with rais- ing to subject). Another complication arises with B™s claim (following Martin, 1996) that there is a difference between ECM/raising to and control to with respect to VP ellipsis. B™s data is given below: (5) a. *John believed Mary to know French, but Peter believed Jane to b. John was not sure he could leave, but he tried to (ECM) (Control) B accounts for this by saying that if to assigns null Case to its specifier (as in con- trol constructions, but not ECM/raising constructions), its complement can be deleted. While the data in (5) is fairly clear, other data is less clear. Consider the following examples: (6) Bush was reported to own a lot of stocks, and Cheney was rumored to _ as well. (p.c., Sally McConnell-Ginet) This data is consistent with the data that B notes in footnote 11 on p. 179, where raising predicates like likely and seems also allow VP deletion in their complements: John believes they are likely to. B claims (following Martin) that likely and seem are actually ambiguous between raising and control predicates. So one way to account for (6) would be to claim that reported and rumored can also be control verbs (as well as passivized ECM verbs). Obviously, this explanation would require a sub- stantially different idea of what constitutes a control verb than is now standard. Chapter 3 concerns a class of ECM constructions exemplified by the verbs alleged and wager. Some examples are given given below: 130 Rook review I Lingua 112 (2002) 127-133 (7) a. *Peter wagered the students to be crazy (p. 49) b. John was wagered to be crazy (p. 49) C. Who did Peter wager to be crazy cp. 49) d. John wagered there to be a stranger in that haunted house (p. 58) I must admit that I find this data very unclear. For example, I do not find a clear difference between (7a) and (7~). Furthermore, (7d) does not seem particularly good to me (see Rooryck, 1997: 9 for related discussion). B claims that this paradigm holds for other verbs as well (p. 51): allege, admit, affirm, allege, atmouttce, cot?- cede, maintain, scream, shout, wager and whisper (see Postal, 1974: 297 for a com- prehensive discussion of this class of verbs). Putting aside these qualms, B™s claims that the ungrammaticality of (7a) follows from the way that agents are projected in the VP. B claims that the projection of agents involves two VP shells, where agents are moved from the specifier of the lower VP shell to the specifier of the higher one. Furthermore, B assumes that the object has its Case checked (overtly) in Spec Agro, which is located above the VP shells. This gives rise to the following structure for (7a) (see p. 54): (8) [ A_eroP rvp Peter, V,, [vp ti wagered [lp the students to be crazy ] ] ] ] I I In this structure, the NP John raises from the specifier of the lower VP into the specifier of the higher VP. The structure is ungrammatical because Peter is now blocked from raising to Spec AgroP by the Minimize Chain Links Principle. While this account works, B gives no independent evidence for his theory of how agents are projected. I am not aware of any other theory where an agent is projected in a lower VP shell and moved into a higher one. The main proposal in chapter four is that expletives lower and adjoin to their as- sociates at LF. This analysis is illustrated with the following example: (9) There is likely to be someone in the garden B claims that his analysis offers a way to resolve the conflict between two com- peting analyses of expletive constructions: Chomsky (1993) and Lasnik (1995). Chomsky (1993) claims that the associate someone raises and adjoins to the exple- tive there at LF. This movement is driven by the fact that son?eone needs to have its Case feature checked (or needs to be assigned Case). Lasnik (1995) claims that someone is assigned Case by he, which is a partitive Case assigner. Lasnik also assumes that the associate adjoins to the expletive at LF, but this movement is moti- vated by the fact that the expletive is an LF affix. Chomsky™s (1993) analysis conforms to Greed, which requires that movement of an NP takes place only to satisfy a property of the NP (Case in the above example). Lasnik™s analysis conforms to Enlightened Self-Interest, which requires that move- ment be driven either by an inadequacy of the moved element or an inadequacy of the target (the affixal property of the expletive in the above example). Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 127-133 131 B proposes an analysis that makes use of elements of both Chomsky (1993) and Lasnik (1995). B proposes that at LF, the expletive there lowers and adjoins to the indefinite NP someone. This movement satisfies Greed, because it is the affixal property of the expletive that drives the movement of the expletive. Since the as- sociate someone is not raising to get Case from Infl, it is possible to maintain Lasnik™s assumption that be assigns partitive Case. The strength of B™s proposal rests on how compelling the underlying assumptions are. For example, B claims that be assigns partitive Case, and gives the following to support his assumption: (10) a. *there someone laughed b. *John wanted there someone dead (P. 75) (p. 75) Citing Lasnik (1995), B argues (lOa,b) are ruled out because the associate some- one does not receive partitive Case. However, recent work by Bowers (1993, 2000: 11) offers a different perspective on examples like those in (10). Bowers argues that the expletive there is generated in Spec PrP, the projection that introduces external arguments (corresponding to VP in Chomsky, 2000). With this one stipulation the facts in (10) follow immediately. Since someone occupies Spec PrP in (lOa), there is no position for the expletive there. Similarly, since someone occupies Spec PrP in (lob), there is no position for the expletive there. Perhaps the most important contribution that B™s chapter four makes to linguistic theory, is his systematic exposition of a class of examples that seem to argue for Greed over Enlightened Self-Interest. I illustrate one of these examples below: (11) a. the belief that it seems that John likes Mary b. *the belief John to seem that ti likes Mary ‚the belief that it seems that John likes Mary™ In (1 la), the N belief takes a finite clausal complement. In (lob), belief takes an infinitival complement. If movement were governed by Enlightened Self-Interest, then (11 b) should be acceptable, because movement of the NP John satisfies the EPP property of the infinitival clause. On the other hand, Greed predicts that (11 b) should be unacceptable, since the Case feature of the NP John is checked prior to move- ment. Although B makes a strong Case for Greed over Enlightened Self-Interest, there is much evidence that argues that Enlightened Self-Interest is empirically superior. This evidence is summarized in Collins (1997) and involves successive cyclic move- ment, and inversion constructions (including locative inversion and quotative inver- sion). An alternative approach to (11 b) would be to assume that the Case feature of an NP must be unchecked before that NP can satisfy the EPP feature of Infl (for related approaches see Chomsky, 2000; Collins, 1995: 88). Chapter 4 concludes with an interesting discussion of the redundancies between the EPP, Greed, the Case Filter and the Inverse Case Filter (the requirement that the Case assigning feature of a head must be checked). 132 Book review I Lingua 112 (20021 127-133 Chapter 5, which is empirically somewhat removed from the previous three chap- ters, deals with participle movement in Serbo-Croation. An example is given below: (12) Istukaoi je ti Petra beaten is Peter ‚(He) beat Peter™ B gives conclusive evidence that the participle does not move to Comp. Rather, B argues that the participle adjoins to the auxiliary. B™s main argument against move- ment to Comp rests on the following data: (13) *Istukao, je nesumnjivo t, Petra beaten is undoubtedly Peter ‚He undoubtedly beat Peter™ The above sentence shows that the participle cannot be moved higher than the sentential level adverb, which is surprising if participles move to Comp. On the other hand, if the participle adjoins to the auxiliary, and the auxiliary is located lower than sentential level adverbs, the data make sense. B™s analysis of participle movement as adjunction to the auxiliary forces him to assume that excorporation is possible, since the auxiliary and the participle are not always adjacent, as the following example shows: (14) Jovan je, nesumnijivo t,+istukao Petra Jovan is undoubtedly beaten Peter ‚Jovan undoubtedly beat Peter™ B™ argues that such excorporation is necessitated by the analysis of Italian causatives, and verb clusters in Dutch. The only real point of contact between chapter five and the preceding chapters is that B argues that participle movement is consistent with Greed (and not the weaker condition of Last Resort, see p. 150). In conclusion, 1 find that the proposals, data and theoretical criticisms of other proposals found in B™s book to be of great interest. Although I find a number of the proposals to be problematic, I believe that the issues and problems discussed in the book have played an important part in setting the stage for later work in the Mini- malist Program. References Abusch, D., 2000. On the temporal composition of infinitives. Handout for talk given at Cornell Uni- versity, March 6th. Bowers, J., 1993. The syntax of predication. Linguistic Inquiry 24, 591-656. Bowers, J., 2000. Transitivity. Manuscript, Cornell University. Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 127-133 133 Chomsky, N., 1993. A minimalist program for linguistic theory. In: K. Hale and S.J. Keyser (eds.), The view from building 20: Essays in linguistics in honor of Sylvain Bromberger, l-52. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 2000. Minimalist inquiries. In: R. Martin, D. Michaels and J. Uriagereka (eds.), Step by step, 89-155. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N. and H. Lasnik, 1993. The theory of principles and parameters. In: _I. Jacobs et al. (eds.), Syntax: An international handbook of contemporary research, 506569. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. Collins, C., 1995. Toward a theory of optimal derivations. In: R. Pensalfini and H. Ura (eds.), Papers on minimalist syntax (The MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 27), 65-103. Collins, C., 1997. Local economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Lasnik, H., 1995. Case and expletives revisited: On greed and other human failings. Linguistic Inquiry 26,615-633. Martin, R., 1996. A minimalist theory of PRO and control. Doctoral dissertation, University of Con- necticut. Postal, P., 1974. On raising. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Rooryck, J., 1997. On the interaction between raising and focus in sentential complementation. Studia Linguistica 51(l), 149. 