ELSEVIER Lingua 112 (2002) 135-144 www.elsevier.com/locate/lingua Book review Ishtla Singh, Pidgins and creoles: An introduction. London: Arnold, 2000. 142 + xv PP. Reviewed by Dennis Kurzon, English Department, Haifa University, Haifa 31905, Israel. E-mail: kurzorQh2.hum.huji.ac.il My own interest in pidgins and creoles started only fairly recently, when a friend of mine on short-term service with the Vanuatu government sent me some news- papers and books in Bislama, the creole spoken in this South Pacific republic. Since the book under review is purported to be an introductory textbook, suitable for sec- ond- and third-year BA students who have taken at least one introductory course in linguistics, which included something on pidgins and creoles, I will try to judge the book from the point of view of someone who is a linguist, but who has had ﬁa brief encounterﬂ, as the author Ishtla Singh says (p. x), with contact languages.™ Of course, unlike the author™s students, I have been in linguistics for over 30 years, so I am not the average naive student, but will try to be one. Furthermore, the reason why the author sat down to write the book under review is her students™ reaction to cur- rent literature for an introductory course on these languages, which is ﬁeither too introductory or too difficultﬂ (p. x). Singh, so she herself claims, has now provided the book to fill the gap. The author divides up the book into four chapters. The first one is the introduc- tion, which deals with definitions. This is followed by three chapters whose subtitles are expressions from Trinidadian creole of which the writer is a native speaker. These subtitles do not seem to signify anything other than the opening, middle sec- tion and final section of traditional Trinidad stories. At this stage, I shall begin at the beginning and describe the content of each chapter in the order they appear. The fist terms to be defined are ‚creole™ and ‚pidgin™, as would be expected in an introductory textbook on that very subject. In the subsection entitled ‚What is a cre- ole?™ (and not ‚what are a pidgin and a creole?‚), Singh in fact defines firstly ‚pidgin™, by focussing on a pidgin called Russenorsk, a ‚jargon™ (is this a pre-pidgin stage or just another term?) which was created every season in the Arctic fishing grounds by Russians and Norwegians. In order to describe the process of the creation ™ Instead of the mouthful ‚pidgins and creoles™, I will use ‚contact languages™ as the superordinate term. 0378.2166/02/$ - see front matter 0 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(01)00036-5 136 Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 135--144 of a language, Singh uses Whinnom (1971)‚s biological metaphor of hybridization. A primary hybrid is, in the context of linguistics, a language that evolves unevent- fully from a parent language, e.g. English from a West Germanic language, which in turn evolved from proto-Indo-European. On the other hand, a secondary hybrid is the result of interbreeding. In biology, this creates unstable systems, and this is also true for languages created by the same method, i.e. by contact and mutual influence of two languages. Whatever the Gastarheitcr may speak in Germany, it is not German, but could be considered a variety of interlanguages (not a term the author uses), each one personal to the speaker, and each one aiming to be German, but without success. This situation may be considered similar to the creation of pidgins, where the European slave owner expected his slaves to pick up enough of his language to com- municate, but the superstrata1 language was the colonial language (as German is in the Gasturheiter situation). However, Singh continues Whinnom™s biological metaphor, there are tertiary hybrids. This occurs when variations are reduced, i.e. when interlanguages become less personal; when grammatical and lexical conven- tions gradually become established; and when grammatical structures develop which cannot be regarded as the result of interference from the native languages of the speakers. This is obvious, since slave owners, and later plantation owners brought together workers from different areas and with different languages to prevent them from conspiring to overpower their masters. In order to communicate, the workers (or slaves) had to devise a means of communication among themselves as well as a language to speak to the bosses. Pidgins are impoverished systems with a lack of surface grammatical complexity, with semantic transparency and vocabulary reduction. The moment its speakers use the pidgin for more than the minimal functions, such as story-telling, the pidgin reaches the expansion phrase, which is the step towards creolization. This is the stage when we find speakers of the new product who have acquired the pidgin as first lan- guage; we then have creoles. A distinction has to be made between the pidgin used as a linguafranca because of the many languages spoken by natives and its nativiza- tion through first language acquisition. But, Singh points out, it is not only a ques- tion of whether there are native speakers or not which distinguishes pidgins from creoles. Creoles tend to be linguistically more complex. The existence of a home language (creole), however, does not guarantee its acceptance by the speech com- munity. If the creole is rejected for reasons of prestige, language death would follow. Creoles have been divided into three types according to the socio-historical cir- cumstances of their origin: (1) fort creoles, created on the west African coast with European superstrata1 and African substrata1 speakers; (2) plantation creoles created in the New World by interaction between masters and slaves or in the Pacific region with indentured labourers; and (3) maroon creoles, originating among escaped plan- tation slaves. This may have importance even for synchronic studies, for there may be linguistic reflexes of the type of initial contact, e.g. the influence of the West African language Ijo on Berbice Dutch. On the other hand, Barbados plantation cre- ole developed when non-English speaking Irish labourers (as prisoners-of-war) were brought over to join English-speaking indentured labourers. The Irish gradually picked up English, and the net result is this plantation creole. Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 135-144 137 The author, in the final sections of the introductory chapter, discusses the place of pidgin and creole studies in linguistics in general. As well as descriptive linguistics of the core type, contact languages may be studied as part of sociolinguistics, his- torical linguistics, and language learning and acquisition. The importance of these languages in sociolinguistics is that, citing Sebba (1997: 288-289) ﬁwithout people interacting in a context, there can be no languageﬂ. Singh devotes some time to the place of contact languages in historical linguistics. She questions the traditional view of language families as straightforward cases of ancestor-descendant development (perhaps a form of asexual reproduction). What is ignored in historical linguistics are often the facts of language contact. Middle English did not simply develop from Old English, but contact with Old Norse speakers (the Danish settlers on the east coast of Britain), for example, led to major changes in English such as the loss of case (p. 23-24). Contact languages, likewise, cannot be considered ﬁa continuation of their respective substrata1 languagesﬂ (p. 26). The term ‚mixed language™ can be used to describe a typical case. Such a language has its lexical and grammatical fea- tures from different sources; Haiti creole is the example presented in the text - it is neither Ewe nor French. Speaking in terms of language family trees does not reflect the situation. After Singh discusses in detail the disadvantages of the family tree metaphor in historical linguistics, she turns to other aspects of the same area: grammaticalization, assimilation, naturalness and codification, although the latter belongs more in the section on sociolinguistics. The lower prestige of a creole may mean that a speaker is ﬁhandicapped by his languageﬂ (Whinnom, 197 1: 109). She then adds that this is a controversial topic, which it is. But she does not cite the case of Ebonies (Black English) in the controversy in 1997 over its status in a Californian educational sys- tem. In fact, this creole - if it is not, then what is it? - is not even mentioned once in the entire book. The second chapter (‚Once long ago, not too long ago: Theories of genesis™), deals with the various theories of how contact languages originated and with theories of language acquisition. Some of the research on creole/pidgin genesis may provide evidence for acquisition theories. In fact, some of the theories that have been put for- ward have created ﬁone of the central and more controversial debates in the field of creolisticsﬂ (p. 37). Singh divides up theories of genesis into three groups, each of which has a number of separate theories. Firstly, she deals with theories of genesis connected to the superstrata1 language. The first theory is ‚Foreigner Talk Theory™, for when you speak to foreigners - people who do not know your language - there is a tendency to simplify. Furthermore, it has been suggested that foreigner talk is also the result of accommodation, imitation and telegraphic condensation. One example of these processes will suffice to show the practical application of foreigner talk theory. This illustration of ‚telegraphic condensation™ comes from Arends et al. (1995: 97): 1st. Did you get the package that was sent from Hong Kong? 2nd. What you say? 1st. Package arrive Hong Kong. You get? 138 Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 135-144 The second theory, based on the effect of the superstrata1 language, Singh names the ‚Imperfect L2 Learning Hypothesis™. According to this theory, the speaker of the superstrata1 language ﬁwill make little or no concession to the fact that [the hearer] does not speak her language fluently (if at all)ﬁ. S/he will try to acquire as much of the language as possible, and will make certain errors which are universal to L2 learners. The universality of errors not only lends support to a generative approach to contact languages (see below on Bickerton™s bioprogram), but also to a poly- genetic beginning to language in general. In this connection, Singh quotes Todd (1974: 42): ﬁThere are universal patterns of linguistic behaviour appropriate to contact situations pidgins and cre- ales are alike because fundamentally, language are alike and simplification processes are alike - human beings are biologically programmed to acquire Langua,qe.ﬂ (Todd™s italics) Thirdly, Singh discusses the Nautical Jargon Theory, evidence for which is found in the extensive number of nautical elements in various English- and French-lexifier creoles. However, she expresses her doubts about the validity of such a theory. Sailors, for example, shipping slaves and others going to work in colonies would not have had direct contact with their human cargo. Furthermore, most of the contact languages spoken today are found on islands and coastal regions of the world, so nautical terms would be abundant because of such circumstances. An approach to the genesis of contact languages based on substrata1 influence includes the monogenetic theory of their birth. Work on creoles in the Caribbean and South American (Suriname) seems to show that the grammatical and phono- logical systems of these languages derive from West African languages, while the vocabulary is European (English, French, Dutch). An extension of this theory sees Portuguese as the original language. A proto-pidgin sprung up in West Africa (called WAPP - West African Pidgin Portuguese) which was used in early settle- ments along the African coast. The substrata1 languages provided the grammar and phonology, while the lexicon was Portuguese. Slaves picked this language up, changing the vocabulary - but not the grammar nor the phonology - according to the language of the colonial power. This process is termed relexification. One of the major weaknesses of this theory is that it is restricted to the creoles of the Western Atlantic, especially those in the Caribbean. It is equally possible that these creoles developed under the same circumstances ﬁwith dialectical forms of one superstrata1 language, Englishﬂ (p. 49). Work on Guinea Coast Creole English has suggested that the creole emerged from marriages between British men and African women who had to use a proto-pidgin to communicate, but settlers on this coast were very few and were temporary. The men may well have learned the rudiments of the African language of the region for immediate communication purposes. If they did ‚marry™ local wives, it was probably for purely physical needs, leaving their ‚wives‚ to care for any offspring. Moreover, if slaves had picked up a pidgin while still in Africa, the question may be asked why the slave owners in America separated the slaves on the basis of the native language. ‚Divide and rule™ is a well-tried means of control, and one way to assure that is not to allow men speaking the same lan- guage to be together. Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 135-144 139 The third group of theories belongs to the ﬁuniversalist dimensionﬂ (p. 52). Firstly, Singh deals with perhaps the best known of such theories - the Language Bioprogram Hypothesis, worked out by Derek Bickerton back in the 1970s and 1980s (e.g. Bickerton, 1981). He argues that the ﬁclassic creole situationﬂ occurs when people are torn from their own native culture and language - when ﬁthe nor- mal continuity of language transmission is most severely disruptedﬂ (Bickerton, 1981: 3). In this situation there is very little input, so the child relies on his or her natural ability to acquire a language. Hence, Bickerton derives his theory from the concept of universal grammar of Chomskyan syntax. When there is no input or insufficient input to offer a model of language, the child™s bioprogram comes into play. So, where creoles are concerned, in any similar situation the result will be sim- ilar. Creoles are similarly structured because of universal grammar. What is more, creoles develop over a very short period of time. They do not go through the pidgin stage, which is contrary to the usually accepted distinction between creoles and pidgins. Later, Bickerton did accept the development of creoles from pidgins in certain situations. Singh goes on to list the twelve features which, according to Bickerton, are pre- sent in classic creoles. Some of them may be present in other languages, but, Bick- erton argues, creoles should have all twelve or most of them. His research was based on Hawaiian Pidgin English and Hawaiian Creole English, but if correct, they should be found in creoles all over the world. These include an article system that distin- guishes specific and non-specific reference, with specific reference divided into known and unknown. Hence in Hawaiian English, we find da (specific known), wan (specific unknown), and zero for non-specific. In Bislama, by way of comparison, we similarly find ia, wall and zero, providing the same distinction. The tense, modal- ity and aspect system would be represented by three separate morphemes; again Bickerton gives examples from Hawaiian creole and pidgin: bin = past tense, stei = continuous (present) and go(n) = modal (conditional). Other features include no inversion in yes/no questions, bi-morphic (or two-word) question words, and an almost non-existent passive. Weaknesses of Bickerton™s bioprogram are seen in the lack of historical data with which it is possible to decide which creoles can be said to have been created cata- strophically. Others criticize Bickerton for basing his theory only on the two Hawai- ian varieties. However, as Singh points out, such a criticism is not justified. He does relate to phenomena in other creoles. Moreover, and this is not discussed by Singh, there is substantial support for building a theory on one language if the argument is based on the existence of an underlying universal structure. We find this with the Chomskyan paradigm, too. Thirdly, to spread oneself over many creoles would pre- vent the reader from seeing the wood from the trees. This approach may be justifi- ably criticized, however, in that examples need not be taken from many creoles. One representative creole from each region, especially where there is no obvious mutual influence involved, would be more persuasive. There are, nevertheless, creoles that could be called classical, e.g. Unserdeutsch, spoken among New Guinean children at a German-run boarding school, which has only four of the twelve features, while Tok Pisin - not a ﬁclassically catastrophic creoleﬂ has eight (p. 63). Singh does 140 Book review I Lingua I12 (2002) 135-144 bring in independent support for the bioprogram in her presentation of a study of deaf children in Nicaragua who created among themselves - in the absence of nor- mal linguistic transmission - a sign language, which constituted a jargon on its way to becoming a pidgin. The various features of this jargon seem to be those features which Bickerton predicted would appear in creoles. Although criticism of Bickerton is widespread - one critic (Sebba, 1997) holds that Bickerton™s negative approach to substrata1 influence ﬁraised the temperature of the debate without necessarily improving its qualityﬂ - there is much ﬁserious food for thoughtﬂ (p. 67) especially in questions of universal grammar. Chapter Three (‚an ™ den de newt spreud UC™YOSS de /an ‚) deals with the creole con- tinuum. Here, the author discusses situations in which the creole is in competition with the superstrata1 language. For example, in Papua New Guinea, Tok Pisin is used alongside English and Hiri Motu (a pidgin with a Papuan language lexifier). The competition in fact is not on equal terms, for the superstrata1 language usually has higher prestige than the creole. The net result of such a situation can be language suicide. Unlike language murder, which may occur between unrelated languages (the example Singh discusses is the loss of Hungarian in Oberwart, an Austrian village, where German is gradually taking over), language suicide occurs when the two lan- guages are related, and especially in creole-speaking communities. An example is Jamaican creole. The creole has not disappeared, but instead of a ‚choice™ of some sort between the superstrata1 language, English, and the creole itself, there has devel- oped a continuum with varieties of English gliding into varieties of Jamaican creole. The example presented is the equivalent of ‚I am eating™. We find forms from the Jamaican creole to a more conventional English: mi a nyam - me a eat - me eatin™ - I eatin™ - I is eaten™ (p. 72) In terms often used in creole studies, the form on the left is a basilect, then we move into the mesolects, arriving finally at the acrolect (the standard language). This would occur when two conditions are fulfilled (according to DeCamp, 1971): (I) the dominant official language of the community is the standard language corresponding to the creole; and (2) a previously rigid social stratification has partially broken down. In cases where all creole speakers have access to the standard - this may occur where there is widespread education - the creole may eventually disappear, since it is of lower prestige than the standard (the acrolect). Singh points out that the standard is not necessarily the standard of the ex-colonial power, but the local stan- dard - that used by ﬁthe well-educated, well-off professionalsﬂ (p. 74). The mesolects in the continuum are governed by the implicational hierarchy (DeCamp, 1971), in which the presence of linguistic feature X in someone™s speech necessarily implies the presence of feature of Y, too. In Jamaican creole, one speaker may use child and eat, another pikni and eat, and a third pikni and rzyn77. The use of both child and nyum in one idiolect would not occur, hence the presence of child implies the presence of cut in this mesolect. Singh then discusses criticism of DeCamp™s approach. Can variation be dis- cussed in terms of one continuum? Are we not talking about a phenomenon which Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 135-144 141 is multi-dimensional? The continuum approach has its supporters, e.g. Rickford, but also its opponents, e.g. Washabaugh. Some of the criticism comes from schol- ars working on other creoles, a situation which constantly seems to produce counter-evidence. Another linguistic situation would be where more than two lan- guages are involved. A continuum of the type presented above would not suffice as a model to describe the sociolinguistic situation in the Cayo District of Belize where Spanish, Carib, standard English and an English-lexifier creole co-exist and compete with each other. Alleyne (1980) sees not a continuum in the move from basilects to the acrolect but the process of decreolization, an ﬁincreasing adoption of standard featuresﬂ (p. 86). The author of the book under review seems to favour the continuum model, since it does effectively describe many creole situations, as in the Caribbean where with education, there is a gradual move to the acrolect, while those who do not pro- ceed very far within the educational system speak a mesolect, if not a basilect. An interesting phenomenon also occurs - that of recreolization: the use of creole, es- pecially basilect forms, in order to express group solidarity and opposition to ﬁauthoritative structuresﬂ (p. 87). This is similar to Trudgill (1974)‚s study in Norwich in which the males in his study used dialectal and substandard forms in order to mark peer group identity. It should be pointed out that not all creole situations follow the pattern discussed above. Haiti creole and standard French seem to exist side-by-side in a diglossic sit- uation. But in fact, there are very few French speakers today; the vast majority of the population are creole speakers; hence there is no real competition, and no movement along some continuum on the way to the acrolect. The final chapter (Crick crack, monkey break ‚e back for a pieced of pommerac) looks at language planning in communities in which a creole or pidgin is spoken. Singh introduces the topic with a general discussion of language planning, dis- tinguishing between corpus planning and status planning. Her illustrations include eighteenth century English, and the revival of Hebrew. She then outlines four ‚pre- cepts™ underlying language planning strategies (based on Cobarrubias and Fishman, 1983): linguistic pluralism (e.g. French and Flemish in Belgium), linguistic assimi- lation and purism (e.g. prescriptivism in English-speaking countries), vemaculariza- tion (e.g. the French-lexifier creole in Haiti), and internationalism (e.g. English as the international language). Singh illustrates this model by discussing language planning in Trinidad, her ‚home™ territory. She presents newspaper excerpts and letters discussing the creole as against a form of standard English. In spite of the widespread use of the Trinidad English Creole, the educational system still regards it as a ﬁbroken Englishﬂ (p. 106). Insisting on standard English in the classroom places a heavy burden on most of the children who speak the creole, especially in light of the accepted pedagogical position that early education should be in the child™s mother tongue. This argument over creole and the standard language is reminiscent of the controversy that has been raging over Ebonies in the USA (see above). Prestige is an important factor, but where most of the population are speakers of the Creole, as in Trinidad, there is no pressure to speak the standard language (as is the case in the United States). 142 Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 135-144 This dichotomy is found elsewhere in creolist situations. In countries where Melanesian pidgins (Tok Pisin, Bislama and Solomon Pijin) are spoken, there are controversies concerning which language or languages are to be used in the educa- tional system (p. 111). The general fear is that since these English-lexifier languages are in many ways close to English itself, the acquisition of the prestigious inter- national language by school pupils will be subject to considerable interference. To pre- vent pushing the creole to one side as the language of the home, and not giving it any function in the public sphere, it has been suggested that native word formation, for example, be encouraged and borrowing of vocabulary from English not be relied on. The author ends the chapter - and the book - with success stories: the establish- ment of the creole in Haiti, the gradual introduction of another French-lexifier creole Seselwa in the Seychelles, the use of Hawaiian Creole English in an early education programme in Hawaii, and the use of Kriol in the education system in Australia™s Northern Territory. However, the author points out, all these locations have adopted the creole as part of a ﬁtransitional bilingual programmeﬂ, when ﬁthe ultimate aim is to achieve competence in an international languageﬂ (p. 116). The book closes with an appendix of newspaper letters on and writings in Trinidad Creole, a glossary of terms, in which only five of the 28 items pertain specifically to contact languages,™ a bibliography and a clearly presented index. How far is the book under discussion an introductory textbook for students having, as stated in the Preface to the book and above, attended some previous linguistics courses, but are still somewhat ‚green™ in the field? The student is introduced to many, if not all, of the approaches that have been adopted in recent years in the study of contact languages. Bickerton™s bioprogram has been given considerable space, certainly reflecting its importance in creolist studies since the early 198Os, although it has been subject to much criticism. Other theories of the birth of a creole are also discussed, although in less detail. Singh also deals with the sociolinguistics and the sociology of creoles and pidgins, looking at specific places where there is a political and/or social conflict between what the people speak and what the government would like or even what the population would like (in terms of prestige). Singh extensively documents some of these conflicts. What is missing is a linguistic analysis of a creole or pidgin beyond Bickerton™s twelve features found in creoles. This is also important in any attempt to distinguish between types of contact languages, not only on the basis of a language with second language speakers in contrast to a language with native speakers. Terms such as ‚extended pidgin™ cannot be seen solely on a historical continuum of the form: jargon + stable pidgin + extended pidgin + creole (p. 9) but structural differences should also be shown, if they do exist, as we understand from Singh™s discussion. For example, is there any basis to the fact that the Mela- 17.8% of the total. In contrast, Sebba (1997), also a textbook but not ‚introductory™, has sixty items in his glossary. 27 of which pertain directly to contact languages (45%). Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 135-144 143 nesian contact languages are still called pidgins (Tok Pisin, Bislama and Solomon Pijin), especially when there are native speakers today? If there is something in the structure of these languages that does distinguish them from Caribbean creoles, let us say, and that justifies a different term, then this should be presented. However, we cannot expect - not only in an introductory textbook but neither in a more advanced work on contact languages - illustrations from many of the world™s contact languages, examples from the Caribbean, from West Africa, and from Oceania. By concentrating on the status, structure and development of one contact language, the student will appreciate the complexity of the area, and may transfer what s/he has learned to other contact languages. That is the nature of things, but some comparative data - the exact amount would be difficult to lay down - are necessary to draw a broad picture. Singh™s focus on Trinidadian creole is therefore justified, especially since she is a native speaker. A student who wants to continue his/her studies in the field of creolistics is pre- sented not only with a broad-ranging (but necessarily brief) discussion of other research, but, as stated above, is also presented with a seven-page bibliography, which covers many of the major contributions to this field. But the author refers in her text to other research - with names, dates and page numbers - which do not, however, appear in the bibliography at the end of the book, e.g. ﬁHe also quotes Matthews (1985: 170-171) . ..ﬂ (p. 50) the ‚He™ being I.F. Hancock. If a reader wants to read the original, s/he has to find the reference indirectly - by looking at the article or book from which Singh has taken the reference, in this case Hancock™s article which appears in a book on Atlantic creoles. There may be some pedagogical reasoning behind this: the student should adopt the habit of checking up sources. However, the author is inconsistent: she cites ‚Trudgill (1983)‚, but a quotation from his book is not taken from Trudg- ill™s book but from MacMahon (1994)‚s book on language change. However, Trudg- ill™s book does appear in the bibliography. This phenomenon may also indicate that Singh herself may not have looked at the cited work - an indirect confession of a case of carelessness. The book is short and manageable as an introductory textbook, but there is room for improvement. References Alleyne, M., 1980. Comparative Afro-American. Ann Arbor, MI: Karoma. Arends, J., P. Muysken and N. Smith (eds.), 1995. Pidgins and creoles: An introduction. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Bickerton, D., 1981. Roots of language. Ann Arbor, MI: Karoma. Cobarubbias, J. and J.A. Fishmdn (eds.), 1983. Progress in language planning: International perspec- tives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. DeCamp, D., 1971. Towards a generative analysis of a post-creole speech continuum. In: D. Hymes (ed.), Pidginization and creolization of languages, 349-370. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Sebba, M., 1997. Contact languages: Pidgins and creoles. London: Macmillan. Todd, L., 1974. Pidgins and creoles. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Trudgill, P., 1974. The social differentation of English in Norwich. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Whinnom, K., 1971. Linguistic hybridization and the ‚special case™ of pidgins and creoles. In: D. Hymes (ed.), Pidginization and creolization of languages. 91-115. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 