ELSEVIER Lingua 112 (2002) 103-l 19 Lingua www.elsevier.com/locate/lingua Locatum and location verbs in Lexeme-Morpheme Base Morphology* Mark Volpe* State Uni>sersity of New, York (SUNY), Stony Brook, NY I 1794, USA Received 2 April 2000; revised version 14 February 2001 Abstract Hale and Keyser™s LEXICAL ARGUMENT STRUCTURE (LAS) (1993, 1997, 1998) is a cur- rently influential hypothesis of verb derivation based entirely on the syntactic principles of HEAD MOVEMENT/INCORPORATION (Travis, 1984/Baker, 1988). A specific claim of LAS con- cerns two types of denominal verbs: LOCATUM, e.g., to saddle, from the syntax of the light verb to provide wzith, and LOCATION, e.g., to sheh,e, from the light verb to put. This article pre- sents a reanalysis of locatum/location verbs within the framework of LEXEME-MORPHEME BASE MORPHOLOGY (LMBM) (Beard, 1995). LMBM, one detailed realization of the type of LEXEME-BASED MORPHOLOGY long advocated by Aronoff (1976, 1994), maintains a strict segregation of open-class lexical categories (LEX- EMES: adjectives, verbs and nouns) from closed-classes (MORPHEMES: adpositions, affixes, pronouns, etc.). By eliminating preposition as a lexical head of phrase, Prepositional Phrases (PP) must be reanalyzed as either Noun Phrase (NP) or Adjective Phrase (AP), a distinction which allows us to take advantage of insights provided by Kiparsky (1997), who notes that syntax of the type assumed by Hale and Keyser is incapable of distinguishing non-existent from existing locatum/location verbs. In addition to the syntactic distinctions provided by LMBM, the adoption of the notion TEN ROLE, ﬁinformation about the use or purpose of an objectﬂ (Pustejovsky, 1995: 86), as part of the semantic representation of nouns, provides a mechanism to account for Kiparsky™s observation that a denominal locatum/location verb must be derived from a ﬁcanonical useﬂ of the base (Kiparsky, 1997: 482). In contrast with Hale and Keyser™s arguments for syntactic ﬂ My thanks to Paolo Acquaviva, Mark Aronoff, Bob Beard, Yoshihiro Kubo, Richard Larson, Fumio Mohri, Nobuaki Nishioka, Hiroaki Tada, Eiji Yamada, and an anonymous reviewer. My special gratitude to Mark A. who gave me many hours of his time, enabling me to dramatically improve the article. Ded- icated to Bob Beard in honor of his recent move to the ranks of Emeritus and with gratitude for his encouragement and interest. My gratitude does not imply that any of the linguists mentioned above agree with my interpretations or are to blame for remaining errors. * Phone: +l (631) 632.7777 (work); +I (631) 216-2386 (home): E-mail: markv58Qyahoo.com 037%2166/02/$ - see front matter 0 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved PII: SOO24-3841(01)00040-7 sufficiency and Kiparsky™s call for reliance on semantic principlea, however, we argue in accord with LMBM™s strict modularity that both syntax and semantics have a role. 0 2UO2 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. KQI~YwNIJ: Lexeme-Morpheme Base Morphology (LMBM): Lexical Argument Structure (LAS); Locatum and location verbs; Telic role 1. Lexical argument structure and location and locatum verbs LEXICAL ARGUMENT STRUCTURE (LAS) (Hale and Keyser, 1993, 1997, 1998), an influential theory of verb derivation based entirely on syntactic principles, has been adopted by both the Minimalist Program (Chomsky, 199.5) and certain versions of Distributed Morphology (Harley and Noyer, 1999). A specific claim of LAS concerns two types of denominal verbs called LO(‚ATlO~, e.g., to shehle, and LOCATIJM, e.g., to saddle, which share identical syntactic base structures, differing only in the properties of the prepositions which head their respective PP complements. In the base structure of location verbs, which conforms with the ‚light verb™ ~241, the abstract P is of the category TERMINAL (WINCIDENCE, the abstract P of locatum verbs, which conforms syntactically to the ‚light verb™ paYtIe with, is the preposition of CETTR~L UIINCILENCE (Hale and Keyser, 1997): (1) V™ ™ ‚1. 1,™ \ V VP put/provide _,-/-‚----\ NP , (Y) /:,., V FP i------ ..____~ P NP [terminal/central I coincidence] N on/with shelf/saddle ﬁVerbs like shelve and suddle are formed using the ‚head movement™ variant of Move-cc . . . by means of Incorporationﬂ (Hale and Keyser, 1993: 54; Travis, 1984, for head movement, and Baker, 1988, for incorporation). ‚The incorporated nominal shelf, an example of terminal coincidence, represents an ‚end-point™ of motion or transfer . . . the incorporated argument saddle corresponds to something (which) comes (to be) had or wornﬂ, illustrating a central coincidence (Hale and Keyser, 1998: 87). Incorporation of the nouns shelj/sudcr™le into the upper V-node via head movement-incorporation assures access to the necessary abstract features: M. Volpe I Lingua 112 (2002) 103-119 105 shelﬂe;addlei ,/-Jl, A V 6 A P NP 4 I N Kiparsky (1997) cites several fundamental problems for the LAS hypothesis, which in his view, justify a complete abandonment of syntactic approaches to denominal and deadjectival Verb formation in favor of Semantic-based principles. The most devastating of his criticisms goes to the very heart of Hale and Keyser™s claim that ﬁprinciples of syntax function to constrain denominal derivationsﬂ, such that ﬁgaps within the English verbal Lexicon can be explained within the incorpora- tion theory of denominal verb formationﬂ (Hale and Keyser, 1993: 54, 60). Prob- lems for LAS are partly the result of the isomorphic base structure advocated for location and locatum verbs: ﬁWhat Hale and Keyser do not explain is why nonexistent (locatum) verbs could not be derived from the other source that the theory provides, (i.e., location verbs).ﬂ (Kiparsky, 1997: 481) Since the phrase structures differ only in the properties attributed to the abstract Ps of terminal and central coincidence: ﬁPutative derivations such as I gave the hush some ,fertilizer+*l husked some fertilizer, or I gave the house a coat ofpaint+*l housed a coat of paint violate a syntactic principle that prohibits the incor- poraton of indirect objects, (but) the derivations I put some fertilizer on the h14.s/1+*1 hushed some fertilizer, I put a coat qf paint on the house+ﬁ1 housed a coat of paint are syntactically unexceptional.ﬂ (Kiparsky, 1997: 481) Thus syntactic principles can not, as claimed, ﬁconstrain derivationsﬂ or ﬁexplain gapsﬂ. A semantic-conceptual constraint proposed by Kiparsky to further illustrate the explanatory limitations of syntax and appeal of semantics, restricts denominal loca- turn/location verbs to ﬁcanonical uses . . . fixed . . . as followsﬂ: a. Locatum verbs: Putting x in y is a canonical use of x. b. Location verbs: Putting x in y is a canonical use of y. (Kiparsky, 1997: 482) We argue below that denominal locatum and location verbs reanalyzed as FUNC- TIONAL LEXICAL-DERIVATIONS (functional L-derivations), one of four types of lexical derivations posited by LEXEME-MORPHEME BASE MORPHOLOGY (LMBM) (Beard, 1995), enables us to eliminate problems associated with Hale and Keyser™s LAS hypothesis. 2. Functional lexical-derivations: An interlude Functional lexical-derivation combines a lexeme with one of the 44 GRAWATICAL FUNCTIONS recognized by LMBM (see Appendix A). These grammatical functions, linguistic primes available to natural language as part of its universal base, are the result of an extensive cross-linguistic survey undertaken by Beard ( 1995).™ The UNI- TARY GRAMMATICAL FCNCTION HYPWHESIS stakes out the theoretical position that grammatical functions determine not only the morphological spelling of declensions in morpho-syntax, but: ﬁThe number and nature of Case property functions and the functions of Functional L-derivation rules are both determined by the universal set of primitive grammatical relations listed in the [Appendix].ﬂ (Beard, 199.5 : 305-306) Lexical-derivation rules are distinguished from inflectional-derivation rules ﬁby defining the former as lexical operations, the latter, as categorial operations in syn- taxﬂ (Beard, 1995: 153, i.e., all L-derivations occur in the lexicon. all l-derivation in syntax. However, in accord with the INTEGRATED SI™ELLING HYPOTHESIS morpho- logical realization of both lexical- and inflectional-derivations occur post-syntacti- cally in the MORPHOLOGICAL SPELLING-COMPONENT (Beard, 1995: 46). ﬁFunctional L-derivations constitute the largest set in languages with word for- mation rulesﬂ (Beard, 1995: 205). Subcategorization constraints on word formation such as the FIRST SrsrEri PRINCIPLE (Roeper and Siegel, 1978) or constraints attrib- uted to the Empty Category Principle (Chomsky, 1981), such as Baker™s theory of INCORPORATION (Baker, 1988), are over-restrictive, leading to under-generation. The following examples of verbal (synthetic) compounds are predicted to be ungrammat- ical by the First Sister Principle and incorporation, but are sanctioned by the Unitary Grammatical Function Hypothesis:™ ™ Grammatical Functions were ﬁcompiled from the lists of Case functions in the major traditional grammars of the classical IE languages, Sanskrit ., Greek . . . . and Latin That list has been com- pounded by Case functions found in grammars of contemporary IE languages and corroborated acrosc a wide variety of randomly selected non-IE languages including Amharic, Archi. Arabic. Bashkir, Basque. Buryat, Cherokee, Chukchee. Dakota, Fijian, Finnish. Georgian, Hausa. Hebrew, Hungarian. Indonesian. Japanese, Kiowa, Koryak. Lezghian, Menomini, Nahuatl, Navajo. Palauan. Quechua. Swahili. Tamil. Tiwi. Turkish, Veps, Yakut, Yupik, Yoruba, and other- languages _. The combined Case-adposition ays- terns of all languages seem to be constrained to the functions represented in [the Appendix]ﬂ (Beard, 1995: 206-207). ™ Since only a limited subset of the grammatical functions which participate in incorporation fall undr~ Baker™s syntactic approach, bifurcation into inflectional and derivational types would be the outcome (Beard, 199.5: 171-173: Evans. 1997). We suggest that LMBM™s unitary account of incorporation is preferable conceptually. (A) 03) cc> M. Volpe I Lingua 112 (2002) 103-l 19 107 MANNER: cold-roll (aluminum), spray-paint (the wall), freeze-dry (coffee). LOCUS: mountain-bike (the trails), road-test (the bike), desert-train (the soldiers), sky-write (a message), back-stab (a neighbor). MEANS: fire-brew (beer), hand-knit (a sweater), machine-wash (clothes), com- puter-test (anything) (Beard, 1995: 173). Aside from the revolutionary theoretical insight entailed by the hypothesis, more importantly, it provides the looser set of constraints required by Universal Grammar to avoid under-generation in its word-formation component. In terms of its mechanism, the operation of functional L-derivation takes place completely in the lexicon where it ﬁreduces to a lexical variety of raising with the amalgamation (incorporation) of complements and adjunctsﬂ (Beard, 1995: 349). In order to maintain its strict modularity, LMBM adopts a version of THE BASE RULE THEORY of Botha (1980), which hypothesizes a linguistic module separate from the lexicon and syntax which is able to feed both. This additional module, the BASE, ﬁgenerates syntactic structures whose nodes bear the morpho-syntactic categoriesﬂ needed for either lexical-derivation or inflectional-derivation: ﬁThe Base is a general grammatical component, a categorial component which accounts for all the gram- matical relations of a language common to syntax, inflection and the Lexicon. Only after lexical selec- tion are lexical and syntactic structures distinguished.ﬂ (Beard, 1995: 328) The base generates a phrase structure which is fed to the lexicon. In line with the optionality of lexical-derivation, a structure may remain in the lexicon after lexical selection, becoming the object of functional L-derivation, or leave the lexicon. If a structure foregoes lexical-derivation, it is subject to the general rule that ﬁall mini- mal projections must be appropriately filled with LEXICAL GRAMMATICAL-FEA- TURE(S) controlled by the Lexicon when a base-generated construction exits the Lex- iconﬂ (Beard, 1995: 343).ﬂ (Cf. Lieber™s CATEGORIAL SIGNATURE, 1992: 88-91.) The most abundant grammatical function of nominative-accusative languages is [SUBJECT], a necessary argument of all VPs. For this reason, examples of [SUB- JECT] functional L-derivation abound in English: ™ LEXICAL GRAMMAIK~L-FEATURES are responsible for distinguishing lexical categories. Where poss- ible, the binary features [zk] are employed: N = [Noun class], [Number], [Gender], [Animacy] V = [Verb class], [Transitivity] A = [Adjective class], [Gradability] Cross-linguistically, transitivity is the lexical grammatical-feature which distinguishes the category V. The grammatical-feature distinctive of A is gradability, responsible for the comparative and superla- tive degrees in [+gradable] adjectives. However, ﬁthere is ostensibly no one category which lexically distinguishes all Nouns, as Transitivity distinguishes Verbs and Gradability defines (Qualitative) Adjec- tivesﬂ (Beard, 1995: 179). Greenberg (1972) identifies the universal tendency for obligatory number morphology to be in com- plementary distribution with numeral quantifier systems. On the premise that numeral quantifiers are chosen according to noun class, this suggests a dichotomy in languages where either number or noun class is the dominant G-feature for noun. 108 M. Volpr I Lin,q4a I12 (2002) 103-119 (3) a. A N CP IP /--\- [SECT, VP I [-Plural][+Sing.] V [+Animate][+Human] bake ]+Transitive] b. NP ,;-1.. N CP one MMe™\,. C ‚IP who, /-\- [SIJIYJ~CTI VP I 4 V bakes Example (3a) exits the lexicon after lexical selection of hake, with lexical gram- matical-features controlled by the lexicon in place. It need only enter the morpho- logical spelling-component for the post-syntactic realization of the closed-class lin- guistic objects known as MORPHEMES, e.g., pronouns, adpositions, articles. and affixes, to be realized as (3b). If this same structure were to remain in the lexicon and undergo functional L- derivation, lexical raising with incorporation would apply with obligatory TRANSPO- SITION of V+N, accomplished through the neutralization of lexical grammatical-fea- tures associated with V and assignment of lexical grammatical-features associated with N:l 4 Transposition is the L-derivation responsible for all changes of lexical class within LMBM: The lex- icon may transpose any member of any major lexical class (N, V, A) to any other major lexical class by providing it only with the lexical grammatical features (G-features) of the target class and neutralizing (but not deleting) the inherent G-features (Beard. 1995: 177). Each language can theoretically contain the following transpositions: a.N-+V c.N+A e. V+N b. A+V d. V+A f.A+N M. Volpe I Lingua 112 (2002) 103-119 109 (4) a. N A C A ,SUegPECT, VP I V bake b. ISU;~;CT] C A I ti A DP VP D V ti C c. Lexical Grammatical Features [0 Transitive] [+Sing.], [-Plural] [+Animate], [+Human] [SUBJECT] d. Post MS-Component N bak-er Although the morpheme -er is common as the morphophonological realization, it is neither a necessary nor sufficient element of SUBJECT functional L-derivations, cf. cook-(O), judge-0, music-iun, Zingu-ist, and particip-ant, which are also [SUB- JECT] functional L-derivations. Moreover, comput-er, wash-er, and dryer, as instruments, are functional L-derivations of the grammatical function [MEANS], though they may also be interpreted as [SUBJECT] L-derivations where the referent is [+Human]. This accords with Beard™s SEPARATION HYPOTHESIS, the claim that ﬁthere is no direct connection between the side of morphology that deals with sound and the side that deals with syntax and semanticsﬂ (Aronoff, 1994: 8). 110 M. Volpe i Lingua I12 (2002) 103-I 19 3. Locatum and location verbs in Lexeme-Morpheme Base Morphology The light verb provide with, the source of locatum verbs for Hale and Keyser, is an example of the [POSSESSION] functional L-derivation in LMBM, where [POS- SESSION], a primary function, is the grammatical function of its most deeply embedded DP/NP (see Appendix A). Primary functions, when morphologically marked, use affixes, either lexical or phrasal, whose position is determined by the morphological principles of the GENERAL THEORY OF AFFIXATION, ﬁa set of parame- ters which limits the distribution of lexical and phrasal affixes to positions on either side of initial or final elements of words or phrases, or on either side of the heads of words or phrasesﬂ (Beard, 1995: 296).5 The General Theory of Affixation is based on Anderson™s claim that ﬁclitics are phrasal affixesﬂ (Anderson, 1992: Chapter 8). Primary function markers, whether phrasal affixes, e.g., with, which marks POSSESSION in English, or case-marking suffixes in Latin and Sanskrit, occupy no structural position in the Base. Under this treatment of primary function-marking prepositions, [POSSESSION] in English has the syntactic structure of the double object verbs. Motivation for viewing locatum verbs as ‚possessional™ has several sources in the literature including Hale and Keyser (1997) and Kiparsky: ﬁ . . . the difference between locatum verbs and location verbs cannot simply be a matter of reversing the located thing with the location in argument structure...Hale and Keyser™s rerminal c~oincidmce (Location) and c,entral coinc~idencr (Locatum) are.. .identified with pure location and possession, respectively.ﬂ (Kiparsky, 1997: 484) Additionally, Pinker (1989) in his discussion of the lexical-semantic representa- tions underlying the dative alternation writes that: ‚/ . . . in the prepositional form, the transferred object is the patient; in the double object form the recipi- ent is the patient (T)his is the representational distinction that underlies the differences (I)n the double object fomr the change of possession is expressed not as an analogue of a motion of the object going to the recipient. but as the direct causation of a state whereby the possessor has the object,ﬂ (Pinker, 1989: 2 I l-21 2) 5 An important tenet of a lexeme-based morphology is that only the open-class linguistic objects, noun, verb and adjective, are members of the lexicon (Aronoff, 1976, 1980, 1994: Beard, 1995). For LMBM, adoption of Anderson™s hypothesis that ﬁclitics are phrasal affixesﬂ (Anderson. 1992) enables the reanalysis of primary grammatical functions as NPs, a move towards the elimination of pre-/postposition as a lexical head of phrase: a. Affixes and clitics are located within the scope of some constituent which constitutes its domain. The domain of an affix is the word; the domain of the clitic is the phrase b. Affixes and clitics are located by reference to the periphery (beginning vs. end) or the head of the constituent in which they appear. The head of a phrase is the element occupying position Xﬂ: the head of the word is the syllable receiving stress. c. Affixes and clitics either immediately precede or immediately follow their point of reference (Beard. I995 : 296). M. Volpe I Lingua I12 (2002) 103-l 19 111 The association of ‚double object™ syntax with the grammatical function [POS- SESSION] therefore seems to be motivated: (5) Functional L-derivation: [POSSESSION] : a. & A V A ,POS&SION] NP I N saddle b. [POSS&SION] saddle, NP -7.i (Y) V/lDP ti D G The denominal locatum verbs we derive from ticket, wax, etc., are provided a derivation which from Hale and Keyser™s denominal verbs. this structure, e.g., saddle, salt, syntactically distinguishes them Location verbs derived in accord with the light verb put are functional L-deri- vations of GOAL, the grammatical function of their most deeply embedded DP/NP. Their syntactic structure is the result of LMBM™s strict segregation of open-class lexemes, N, V, and A, from closed-class ‚morphemes™, adpositions, affixes, pro- nouns, determiners, etc. In a lexeme-based morphology, prepositions like other closed-class linguistic objects are unable to head lexical phrases. This demands that prepositional phrases be reanalyzed as either NP or AP. Roughly, those grammatical functions which are marked by simple case-marking affixes in inflectional languages such as Latin, Russian and Sanskrit (the non-spatial PRIMARY FUNCTIONS) are NPs, this according to the General Theory of Affixation (see footnote 5). 112 M. Volpe I Lingua 112 (2002) 103-119 The remaining grammatical functions, the PRIMARY SPATIAL FUNCTIONS, LOCUS, GOAL, and ORIGIN, and all SECONDARY FUNCTIONS, are APs. APs are subcat- egorized for by the functional phrase DelP (delimiter phrase) according to the DEFECTIVE ADJECTIVE HYPOTHESIS (Beard, 1995; Volpe, 2000).6 (Cf. DEGREE PHRASE, Abney, 1987.) The primary spatial functions, LOCUS, GOAL, and ORIGIN, have the additional property that they can be subspecified by secondary spatial functions, e.g., IN- ESSION (in), ADESSION (on), SUBESSION (under), POSTERIORITY (h~hind), etc., together forming COMPOUND FUNCTIONS; that is, [GOAL[INESSION]] -+ i&o. [GOAL[ADESSION]] -+ onto, [ORIGIN[SUBESSION]] + fi-on1 under, [ORI- GIN[POSTERIORITY]] -+ .from hehind, etc. : (6) Functional L-derivation: [GOAL[2nd Spatial Function]] a. & V VP A. NP V™ (Y> V DelP Del- [GOAL[ADESSION]] A ‚AP NP I N shelf Again, in a lexeme-based morphology, the closed-class linguistic objects, including prepositions, are segregated from the open-classes: adjective, noun and verb. Together with the General Theory of Affix- ation, the DEFECTIVE ADJECTIVE HYPoTtlESls eliminates preposition as a head of lexical phrases. Preposition Phrase has long had some oddities associated with it, including its lack of a functional phrase. The Defective Adjective Hypothesis provides Universal Grammar with three lexical phrases, each with its own unique functional phrase. Analogous to DP which when headed by pronouns can sup- port unheaded NPs, or IP which can support unheaded VPs when headed by auxiliaries, a DelP (delim- iter phrase) headed by spatial prepositions can support unheaded APs (see Postal (1971) for spatial prepositions as adjectives). Additional support for the reanalysis of spatial grammatical functions as APs is the use of the same or allomotphically-related specifiers to modify both adjective/adverb and spatial grammatical functions cross-linguistically (Beard, 1995: Volpe, 2000). M. Volpe I Lingua 112 (2002) 103-119 113 b. ,GOAL,A;ESSION,, shelve, NpYr V™ (Y) VA DelP ti Dep*P ti A NP ti I N ti The problem of syntactically distinguishing locatum from location verbs, implied in Kiparsky™s critique, is resolved on the basis of theoretically recognized categorial distinctions between primary grammatical functions and spatial grammatical func- tions which provide distinct syntactic structures for the locatum and location verbs. However, as best illustrated by the contrast in acceptability for the ‚minimal pair™, *to church moneylto bank money, Kiparsky™s non-occurring denominal Verbs are not eliminated on the basis of syntactic differentiation, alone. An additional ‚mystery™, however, concerning the most deeply embedded argu- ments sanctioned by denominal location verbs finds an explanation within the prin- ciples of LMBM. Hale and Keyser briefly discuss a restriction on denominal loca- tion verbs which limits ‚adverbial™ and ‚classificatory™ characteristics of potential arguments that may occupy the syntactic position vacated by the incorporated Nouns. In the case of the Verb shelve, potential arguments are limited to ﬁshelvable entities in a place which is shelflikeﬂ (Hale and Keyser, 1997: 44), e.g., shelve a book on a windowsill I? *sheEve a book on the jloor: ﬁHow could we explain that . . the location must be, if not exactly a shelf, then at least a very shelf-like thing?.ﬂ (Kiparsky, 1997: 487) Hale and Keyser attribute this property to an ‚increment™ remaining from the abstract P. However, they confess that ﬁthe acquisition of this increment is . . . totally mysterious . . . at this pointﬂ (Hale and Keyser, 1997: 44). In LMBM, an explanation is linked to the fact that the source of denominal location verbs is not the grammatical function GOAL alone, but [GOAL[2nd Spatial Func- tion]], i.e., compound spatial functions. As mentioned above, the primary spatial func- tions, LOCUS, GOAL, and ORIGIN, can be optionally subspecified by many of the secondary spatial functions, combinations determined on a language-specific basis. The verb shelve is derived from the compound grammatical function [GOAL[ADESSION]]. This is the source of the ‚increment™ whose mechanism is sought by Hale and Keyser. As a derived Verb, shelve is more specifically con- 114 M. V&e I Linguu I12 (2002) 103-119 strained vis-ci-vis the Lexemes which can become its GOAL arguments by its sec- ondary spatial function ADESSION (see Jackendoff, 1990: 70-71, for ‚optional outer functions™). An inspection of Kiparsky™s list of denominal location verbs (Kiparsky, 1997: 479) shows that the vast majority fall into two classes; functional L-derivations of [GOAL[ADESSION]], e.g., bed, shelve, ground, land, table, etc., or [GOAL[IN- ESSION]], e.g, bank, bottle, cage, house, jail, pocket, etc. It seems clear that the properties Hale and Keyser attribute to Prepositions through the ad hoc concept of terminal and central coincidence are not properties associated with lexemes, the status seemingly attributed to preposition by Hale and Keyser. In fact their Abstract Ps possess the properties of closed-class, paradigmatic linguistic objects, i.e., the exact attributes grammatical functions sanction in LMBM. A specific solution to the problem of overgeneration and gaps in the lexicon of English denominal locatum/location verbs stems from the fact that they must obey the following principle: ﬁIf an action is named after a thing, it involves a canonical use of the thing.ﬂ (Kiparsky, 1997: 479) LMBM recognizes that each lexeme, N, V, and A, comprises a ﬁmutually implied tripletﬂ consisting of G-(grammatical), P-(phonological), and R-(semantic) represen- tations (Beard, 1995: 45). As part of their R-representation, all nouns, including the bases of functional L-derivations, possess a TELIC ROLE, information about the ﬁpur- pose and function of an objectﬂ (Pustejovsky, 1995 : 86). Such information, we claim, is used in the functional L-derivations of locatum and location verbs. Loosely stated: The telic function of [GOAL[INESSION/ADESSION]]‚s N + to put [OBJECTI™s N in/on [GOALI™s N. bunk™s use/purpose is ﬁto put nloney inﬂ --+ to hunk money *church™s use/purpose is ﬁto put money inﬂ -+ *to church money *house™s use/purpose is ﬁto put paint onﬂ + *to house paint ﬁhush™s use/purpose is ﬁto put fertilizer onﬂ -+ *to hush f>rtilizer (7) A [+TraLitive] A A A NP V ,OB;CT] ( DelP N Del money [GOAL[INESSlON]] /% A NP N bank M. Volpe I Lingua 112 (2002) 103-119 115 The telic function of [POSSESSIONI™s N + to provide [OBJECTI™s N with [POSSESSIONI™s N. house™s use/purpose is ﬁto provide people withﬂ -+ to house the homeless paint™s use/purpose is ﬁto provide surfaced objects withﬂ -+ to paint a house fertilizer™s use/purpose is ﬁto provide plant life withﬂ + to fertilize a hush [+TraLitive] A A 34 [OB;CT] NP V /I? N D NP people [POSSESSION] / N house The telic role of Ns which derive denominal location verbs explicates the dichotomy: *to church money/to bank money. Over-generation in the English lexi- con of denominal locatum/location verbs can be avoided by reference to the telic roles of noun bases which participate in [POSSESSION] and [GOAL[2nd spatial function]] L-derivations. While it seems that the semantic principle of ‚canonical usage™ is a necessary con- dition constraining the formation of locatum/location verbs from nouns, there are many denominal verbs which are not so constrained, for example, those denominals derived from proper nouns, e.g., to houdini (Clark and Clark, 1979). The notion of telic roles, however, has previously been employed within LMBM to explicate the transposition of instrumental nouns to verbs (see Beard, 1995 : 182-184, who contra- Kiparsky, 1997, argues that [MEANS] functional L-derivation is the source of verbs denominally-derived by instrument nouns which make reference to their telic roles). An additional disagreement lexeme-based morphology of the type adopted here has with LAS concerns another of Kiparsky™s ‚free syntactic points™ for Hale and Keyser: ﬁWhy does the incorporated N never saturate a Theta-role; that is, why is it always possible to add a syntactic expression which corresponds to the putatively incorporated one . ..?ﬂ (Kiparsky, 1997:48&481) Lexeme-based morphology™s answer to this query is found in Aronoff™s WORD FOR- MATION RULES (WFR) (1976): ﬁ[Nlovel zero-verbs (which include Locatum/Location verbs) are produced by a Word Formation Rule . Such a rule has syntactic, semantic, and morphophonological subparts . [A] WFR defines a class of 116 M. Valpe I Lingua 112 (20021103-119 lexical items by forming them [Elxisting words are treated derivatively by applying WFR™s as redun- dancy rules.ﬂ (Aronoff, 1980: 746-747) While Hale and Keyser seem to believe that denominal locatum/location verbs can be derived syntactically on-line for each use at their level of L-SYNTAX (1993), we claim that the phenomena of unsaturated theta-roles in the incorporated ex- pression™s syntactic position is evidence for prior lexicalization of at least the type of denominal verbs discussed here. In fact, any denominal verb we can discuss as such has already been lexicalized, not syntactically-derived, in our view. The LMBM framework insures that functional L-derivations such as the locatum and location verbs discussed here enter the lexicon on their first use. In LMBM, syn- tactic structures along with associated grammatical functions are base-generated (see above). Upon a structure™s entering the lexicon, lexical selection occurs with optional lexical-derivation. For those lexemes which opt for lexical-derivation, they must remain in the lexicon until a syntactic structure arrives from the base for them to be placed in. 4. Conclusion The use of telic roles to constrain the syntactic derivation of denominal loca- tion/locatum verbs might be seen as a mechanism easily adapted to a variety of frameworks. We believe this is a positive aspect of the proposal offered here. In con- trast with Hale and Keyser™s arguments for syntactic sufficiency and Kiparsky™s call for reliance on semantic principles, we have argued in accord with LMBM™s strict modularity that both syntax and semantics have a role to play in the formation of locatum/location denominal verbs. While over-generation and gaps in the English lexicon can only be explicated by providing a mechanism for the phenomena described as ‚canonical uses™, syntactic differentiation accomplished through LMBM provides explanations for its share of phenomena, including what we have here called the ‚increment mystery™ (Hale and Keyser, 1997: 44; Kiparsky, 1997: 487). Appendix A: Japanese L-derivations (after Beard, 199.5: 391-391) I. Primary Functions 1. Agent Ergative-absolutive languages 2. Patient ﬁ ﬁ 3. Subject kyyBiku-SHA (‚educator™) hik&SHI (‚pilot™), hanashi-TE (‚speaker™) 4. Object taih&SHA (‚the arrested™), higai-SHA (‚a victim™) 5. Possessivity ? 6. Possession kancmochi (‚gold carrying™=‚a rich person™), yokuhari (‚greed spread- ing™=‚a glutton™), deppa (‚a bucktooth person™) 7. Measure 8. Material ? TETSU-d6 (‚IRON road™=railroad), MOKU-hai (‚WOOD cup™), M. Volpe I Lingua 112 (2002) 103-119 117 9. Partivity 10. Distinction 11. Absolute 12. Means 13. Route 14. Manner 15. Ession 16. Duration 17. Iteration 18. Accordance 19. Purpose 20. Exchange 21. Cause 22. Sociation Spatial 23. Location 24. Goal 25. Origin GYl?-nya (‚COW-milk™), TON-soku (‚PIG-feet™) shigeki-ZAl (‚stimulant drug™), hik&KZ (‚flight machine™=‚airplane™) (cf. hikb-shi, above) kei-YU (‚via™), YU-rai (‚the source™) Osaka-Fl? (‚Osaka-style™), tosei-RYfi (‚in the contemporary style™) Essive adjectives with suffix -ku: antepenultimate stress) (cf. manner adverb with suffix -ku: penultimate stress) ichinen-KAN (‚a one year period™), kG-KAN (‚a space™), ki-KAN (‚a period™) MAl-getsu (‚every month™), SAI-h&G (‚rerun™) nenrei-BETSU (‚according to age™), shokugy&BETSU (‚by occupation™), kokuseki-BETSill (‚according to nationality™) gaikokujcn-YO (‚for foreigners™), k8ji-Yd (‚for use in construction™), jikken-YO (‚for experimental use™) ry&GAE (‚change of monetary denomination™), nori-KAE (‚change trains, planes, etc.‚), fuki-KAE (‚foreign language dubbing™) minshu-KA (‚democratization™), kikai-KA (‚mechanization™) D&r$ (‚co-workers™), KY&son (‚coexist™), hanashi-AU (‚discuss™) chtisha-J8 (‚parking lot™), kenky&JO (‚research center™), saiban-SHO (‚court room™) Osaka-YUKI (‚Osaka-bound bus, train, etc.‚), Osaka-CHAKU (‚Osaka arrival™) gaikoku-SE1 (foreign-made™), gaikoku-JIN (‚a foreigner™), Osaka- HATSU (‚Osaka departure™) 2. Secondary Functions7 Spatial 26. Inession UCHI-umi (‚inland sea™), koku-NAI (‚domestic™), kliki-CHU (‚mid-air™) 27. Adession UWA-shiki (‚on-top spreading™=‚rug™), sen-JO (ﬁon board a ship™), kai- JO (‚on the sea™), oku-JO (‚on the roof™) 28a. Anteriority moku-ZEN (‚before one™s eyes™), MAE-naki (‚preface™), MAE-ba (‚front tooth™ 28b. (Temporal) SAKI-barai (‚pre-pay™), ZEN-dait&yG (‚previous President™), go-ZEN (‚noon before™=‚A.M.‚) ™ Underlined lexical-derivations are examples of secondary functions which can use the same mor- pheme for both lexical- and inflectional-derivations (Beard, 1995: 308). Dual use for both lexical- and inflectional-derivation is one of the traits distinguishing secondary function-marking from primary func- tion-marking morphemes. The existence of this phenomenon in Japanese, as well as the IE-languages English and Serbo-Croatian, strengthens claims of universality, in addition to providing concreteness to the primary-secondary bifurcation. 118 M. Volpe I Lingua I12 (2002) l&-l I9 29a. 29b. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. Posteriority USHIRO-awase (‚back to back™), USHIRO-_vuhi (‚behind finger™=‚talk behind one™s back™) (Temporal) ATO-aji (‚after-taste™), KO-ki (‚after term™=‚2nd semester of the school year™), se/z-GO (‚after World War 2™) Superession UWA-ni (‚overcoat™), _-u-JO (‚overhead™) Subession SHITA-ri (‚underwear™), ishiki-KA (‚subconcious™), (-hi-KA (‚under- ground™) Transession WATARI-dori (‚crossing bird™=‚migratory birds™), TO-hei (‚across to America™), TO-sen-ha (‚crossing boat place™=‚pier™), WATASHI-hune (‚ferry™) Intermediacy AIDA-pat-a (‚a relation™, i.e., between father and son), nichi-hei-KAN (‚bi-lateral, between Japan and the U.S™), satr-koku-KAN (‚among three countries™) Prolation ? Proximity mi-JIKA (‚near at hand), CHIKA-michi (‚close road™=‚shortcut™), KIN-j™G (‚near place™=‚neighborhood™), KIN-en (‚close family relation™) Opposition TAI-saku (‚counter measure™), TAI-ketsu (‚showdown™), TAI-iin-iir-ai (‚anti-personnel mine™) Perlation ? Circumession MAWARI-nzichi (‚around road™=‚a detour™), SHU-i (‚circumference™), 39. Termination Non-Spatial 40. Concession 41. Distribution 42. Exception 43. Privation 44. Tbematicity References SHU-hen (‚the surroundings™) SHU-ten (‚the last stop™, i.e., (a bus, a train, etc.), ‚a (bus) terminal™). SHU-kyoku (‚the Finale™), SHU-shinkei (‚end of body sentence™=‚impris- onment for life™) KAKU-gaku-bu (‚each faculty™, i.e., Humanities, Law, Economics, etc.), KAKU-jin KAKU-sama (‚to each his own™) 3 na-NASHI (‚anonymous™), MU-imi (‚meaningless™) ky&ku-JO (‚pertaining to education™), sh6bai-JO (‚as regards business™), gaiken-JO (‚in terms of appearance™) Abney, S., 1987. The noun phrase in its sentential aspect. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT. Alsina, A., J. Bresnan and P. Sells (eds.), 1997. Complex predicates. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications. Anderson, S., 1992. A-morphous morphology. New York: Cambridge University Press. Aronoff, M.. 1976. Word formation in Generative Grammar. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Aronoff, M., 1980. Contextuals. Language (56)4, 744-758. Aronoff, M., 1994. Morphology by itself. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Baker, M., 1988. Incorporation. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Beard, R., 1995. Lexeme-morpheme base morphology. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. Botha, R., 1980. Word-based morphology and synthetic compounding. Stellenbosch Papers in Linguistics. M. Volpe I Lingua 112 (2002) 103-119 119 Chomsky, N., 1981. Lectures on government and binding. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Chomsky, N., 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Clark, E. and H. Clark, 1979. When nouns surface as verbs. Language 55: 767-811. Evans, N., 1997. Role or cast? Noun incorporation and complex predicates in Mayali. In: A. Alsina, J. Bresnan and P. Sells (eds.), Complex predicates, 397430. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications. Greenberg, J., 1972. Numeral classifiers and substantival number: Problems in the genesis of a linguis- tic type. In: Working Papers in Language Universals 9, l-39. Hale, K. and S.J. Keyser, 1993. Argument structure. In: K. Hale and S.J. Keyser (eds.), The view from Building 20, 53-109. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Hale, K. and S.J. Keyser, 1997. On the complex nature of simple predicators. In: A. Alsina, J. Bresnan and P. Sells (eds.), Complex predicates, 29965. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications. Hale, K. and S.J. Keyser, 1998. The basic elements of argument structure. In: H. Harley (ed.), MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 32: Papers from U Penn/MIT Roundtable on Argument Structure and Aspect, 73-118. Cambridge, MA: MITWPL. Harley, H. and R. Noyer, 1999. Distributed morphology. Glot International 4(4), 3-9. Jackendoff, R., 1990. Semantic structures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Kiparsky, P., 1997. Remarks on denominal verbs. In: A. Alsina, P. Sells and J. Bresnan (eds.), Complex predicates, 473499. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications. Lieber, R., 1992. Deconstructing morphology. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press. Pinker, S., 1989. Learnability and cognition: The acquisition of argument structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Postal, P., 1971. Cross-over phenomena. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Jovanovich. Pustejovsky, J., 1995. The generative lexicon. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Roeper, T. and M. Siegel, 1978. A lexical transfotmation for verbal compounds. Linguistic Inquiry 9: 199-260. Travis, L., 1984. Parameters and effects of word order variation. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT. Volpe, M., 2000. The defective adjective hypothesis and Japanese phrase structure in Lexeme-Mor- pheme Base Morphology. Fukuoka University Review of Literature and Humanities (32)l. Fukuoka, Japan. 