ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 581-616 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Acquiring the phonology of lexical tone in infancy* Phil Harrison* Department (sf Phonetics und Liaguisrics, University College London, Gower Street, London WCIE 6BT, UK Received 31 May 1999; revised version 21 January 2000 Abstract Phonology is bimodular: prosody (relationaf aspects) and melody (‚phonetic™ aspects) are to some extent autonomous in steady-state (adult) language. Therefore the acquisition of indi- vidual melodic and prosodic modules and their subsequent orientation with respect to one another must constitute three different developmental tasks. The acquisition of melodic primes may take place independently of any other process. If infant perception has this kind of phonological import, then disparate phonetic reflexes which are predicted as phonologi- cally identical might show parallels in acquisition. In Government Phonology, general theory argues that the same abstract melodic objects underlie both laryngeal contrasts in stops and lexical tonal contrasts. Earlier studies show that language-specific attunement to stop contrasts has taken place by the age of six to eight months. Tests on lexical tone perception are now reported, using both adults and infants. The results show that at around six months of age, babies acquiring YoriibB, a language which has a three-way contrast for tone. attend more closely to pitch changes within the minimal domain word than do English controls. Further, they only attend to those pitch changes that possess phonological import within that domain in the steady-state Ianguage. In this their perception * Parts of this article have appeared in earlier versions in UCL Working Papers in Linguisrics 8 (1996) and 10 (1998). Also, Sections 3 and 4 comprise Chapter 4 of Harrison (1999). During the course of this work, I have been indebted to several members of staff at UCL. I am particularly grateful to John Har- ris, who used up vast amounts of his valuable time reading and rereading drafts. Thanks also to Andy Faulkner, Mark Huckvale, Steve Nevard and Andrew Simpson for a variety of help concerned with the implementation of ‚real™ experiments, to Akin Oyetade, my informant for the YonZrba data, and to the other adults who participated in the perception tests. Nothing would have been achieved without the cooperation of the parents of the infant subjects, who were very generous with their own time and that of their offspring. Other UCL staff and students were also kind enough to assist with these experiments, which were made possible by financial assistance from the department of Phonetics and Linguistics at UCL and from the UCL Graduate School. Finally thanks to an anonymous reviewer at Linglta for com- ments and criticism. * Phone: +44 20 1380 7414; Fax: +44 20 7383 4108; E-mail: phil~ling.ucl.ac.uk 0378-2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00003-6 582 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581-416 exactly parallels that displayed by the adult speakers. Finally, both adults and infants display a particular asymmetry in perception in that they discriminate the high/mid tone distinction but fail to perceive the mid/low contrast where no linguistic context is present. This was not predicted at the onset of testing, but it is argued that it may well have a phonological expla- nation, which could align this finding with the typological asymmetries to be found in the dis- tribution of lexical tone in Yoruba and other west African languages. 0 2000 Elsevier Sci- ence B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Acquisition of phonology; Infant perception; Lexical tone 1. Introduction Phonology, to the best of our present understanding, comprises two systems. Speech errors (Levelt, 1992: Sff.), diachronic change (Harris, 1994: 35) and prosodic minimality (McCarthy and Prince, 1986) are among the independently- motivated arguments we can muster to show that prosody (relational properties, syl- lable structure . . .) and melody (‚phonetic™ properties like coronality, continuancy etc.) should be recognised as two interdependent systems. These systems are here assumed (as is usual in Government Phonology) to contract non-linear relations across the ‚skeleton™, a set of timing slots which acts as an interface, being both the lowest level of syllable structure and the tier with which autosegmentally-arranged melodic primes (‚elements™) associate. This model owes its pedigree to Anderson and Jones (1974), Kaye et al. (1985) and Schane (1984) among others, and is specif- ically expounded in Harris (1994) and Harris and Lindsey (1995). Such a basic bifurcation in ‚phonology™ demands that phonological acquisition be recognised as having three components : melody and prosody are acquired discretely, and also their integration must proceed independently. The alternative to this pro- posal is that prosody and melody are acquired as one and differentiate later in life. Such an alternative does not seem remotely defensible, and would require a general account of how it is possible to devolve two linguistic structural systems from one supersystem.™ Using this model, phonology amounts to a language-dedicated pattern-recognition system, and evidence of its acquisition may be sought in early life, ahead of and independent of the acquisition of any other linguistic function. The enterprise reported here seeks to relate some perceptual abilities at six months of age to aspects of general phonological theory.2 ™ During acquisition, simplex structures within a single system may bifurcate or differentiate. The acquisition of branching onsets, and of the representations for palatality and labiality are two exam- ples, one taken from either side of the skeletal divide. Some form of analysis and synthesis of con- generic objects is crucial to other aspects of phonological development (for instance, the acquisition of vocalic primes), but the notion that two structural systems could be prised apart during ontogenesis is untenable. * Establishing such a link may solve a few problems for phoneticians: see Harrison (1999: 3941). P. Harrison I Lingua II0 (2000) 581416 583 The developmental literature abounds with tales of infant perceptual precocity,7 but neither a psychologist nor a linguist would want to limit their investigations to a mere depiction of these abilities. We are reminded that ﬁ... we need to know not merely whether such abilities are present, but how they are possible and what cogni- tive processes are involvedﬂ (Karmiloff-Smith, 1995: 1307). Changes in infant speech perception in year one of life (and before) are invariably relevant to the target language (Jusczyk and Derrah, 1987; Bertoncini et al., 1988; Mehler et al., 1988; Werker and Lalonde, 1988; Best, 1991, among others). It is easy to concur with Kaye that we would ﬁ. . . regard any linguistic theory with some suspicion if its paired acquisition model were unduly complex, not to say impossi- bleﬂ (Kaye, 1997: 219). One ideal would therefore be to propose the simplest possi- ble links between changes in infant perception and the setting of phonological para- meters. For instance, Kuhl™s Native-Language-Magnet theory (1992, 1994, etc.) proposes that by six months of age humans have developed specific vowel proto- types within endowed compartmentalised vocalic space. This vowel space has been represented two-dimensionally by Kuhl (1992: 4.54), using formant values for Fl and F2 as the axes, but the map could be drawn in any way that ﬁconveys the idea that at birth humans can discriminate all phonetic contrastsﬂ (Kuhl, p.c.). A proto- type, one of which may develop within any of the endowed ‚compartments™, acts as a magnet for vowel tokens perceived later, the net result being a loss of finesse of perception close to the prototypical value. Kuhl™s theory could readily be linked to the acquisition of raw phonological vowel melody, as yet unchained to prosodic structure. Though the remainder of this discussion focusses on the acquisition of laryngeal melodic contrasts, rather than vowels, the results to be reported here are best regarded as simply one example of the benefits of integrating phonology and perceptual testing. The motivation for the original experiments (reported in Sections 3 and 4, below) is entirely phonological. To make this clear, we first need to recapitulate some ven- erable experiments in the perception of stop contrasts. 2. Phonology and the categorical perception of stop contrasts by infants ‚Categorical perception™ involves the imposition of perceptual category bound- aries at scientifically arbitrary values within a continuum. Though in certain circum- stances such boundaries may be shifted in a given phonological context, it is never- theless possible to achieve clear and predictable labelling functions of phonation (‚voicing™) contrasts for stops in steady-state language. An important acoustic cue for these contrasts is the time difference between the release of closure and the onset of vocal-fold activity, known as Voice Onset Time (hence VOT).4 The results of 3 For a review of such literature, see Karmiloff-Smith (1995). 4 In the mature language, VOT is not the only acoustic cue for ‚voicing™, the audibility of formant tran- sitions being at least as perceptually important for some speakers and for some distinctions. VOT remains, however, robustly relevant to these perceptual discriminations. 584 P. Harrison I Linguu 110 (2000) 581416 experiments showing categorical perception of stop consonants by infants display a sensitivity to exactly those categorical boundaries in the VOT continuum that will become relevant to the adult phonology. Eimas et al. (197 1) detected a Voice Onset Time (VOT) discriminatory boundary at around +25 ms for bilabial stops in English- acquiring infants as young as one month old. This coincides with the VOT boundary which cues the fortis/lenis distinction in the steady-state language. Not all languages that utilise ‚voicing™ distinctions cued by VOT values put the categorical boundary in the same place. Spanish, for instance, has a ‚voiced/voice- less™ demarcation at about 0 ms VOT. In view of this, it becomes possible to inves- tigate how linguistic input may alter such perception during infancy. Eilers et al. (1979), using the Visually Reinforced Infant Speech Discrimination (VRISD) para- digm,5 reported a cross-linguistic study of 6-8 month old infants acquiring Spanish and English. Their results showed that while the English children were more sensi- tive to the English system, the Spanish children were statistically more able to per- ceive both the foreign- and the native-language boundaries. Thus the Spanish chil- dren at this age are in the process of transferring systemic import from the ‚factory setting™ to the native categorical value. The characterisation of the English-value boundary as a pre-set is also supported by the finding that this boundary is also pre- sent in other mammals, including chinchilla (Kuhl and Miller, 1975). Can we safely deem these developments by six months of age ‚phonological™? One kind of empirical evidence that would support the idea that infant perceptual abilities bear directly upon the target linguistic system would be the successful demonstration of parallels in the acquisition of two classes that are phonetically dis- similar but are analysed as reflexes of the same phonological prime. The traditional fortis/lenis bifurcation of English stop consonants is characterised in Government Phonology (hence GP) element-theoretic terms as a distinction between segments containing the laryngeal element [H] (the aspirated series) and one which lacks this element (the non-aspirated series).6 The lenis series is therefore neutral as far as laryngeal specification is concerned, and in this respect identical to the southern French, Greek and Spanish ‚voiceless™ stops. In these languages, the phonological distinction is between the neutral series and the ‚fully voiced™ set, which contains the element [L], whose presence can be betrayed by the assimilation of voicing to adjacent positions, a phenomenon which never occurs from English lenis stops (Harris, 1994: 133-137). Analysing the experiments cited above in these terms leads us to propose that while categorical perception is an endowed routine in some mammals (at least humans and chinchilla), the setting of the category bound- ary in homo sapiens sapiens depends on attunement to the local phonological envi- ronment. The perception of the ‚English™ boundary by the Spanish children is merely a (psycho)acoustic hangover. Now laryngeal elements [L] and [H] are also proposed to be potentially compo- nential in nuclear (‚vowel™) positions where they are the active tonal elements in lex- s Described in more detail in Section 4. I. 6 A brief definition of ‚elements™ as ‚phonetically-interpretable melodic primes™ will suffice for present purposes. P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581-616 585 ical tone languages (Kaye et al., 1990).™ Given these acoustic alter egos of [H] and [L] in different prosodic positions, there is an opportunity to see if the demonstrated perception of VOT by six month old children is paralleled by a similar sensitivity to tonal contrasts, providing us with one test of a maximally simple acquisitional hypothesis, namely that perception in year one of life is already being transduced into phonological information having systemic import. 3. Lexical tones in Yortibh and adult perception The operational focus of this paper is the investigation of the perception of lexi- cal tone in infancy. A necessary prerequisite of such an investigation is to gain a knowledge of the perceptual routine(s) used by adults to map from the acoustic sig- nal to the phonological objects which subtend lexical tone. 3.1. Background to the adult perception tests Lexical tones are acoustically cued by changes in the value of the fundamental frequency (hence Fx) of the speech signal. The perceptions of different aspects of the speech signal are undertaken in different ways. We know that the perception of stop contrasts is quintessentially categorical, whereas the strategy employed for distin- guishing vowels is prototypical in nature. Is categorical or prototypical perception used in the perception of tone, or is such perception, as seems often to be tacitly assumed, wholly dependent upon the pitch relationships within an utterance? The psychoacoustic percept of pitch is mapped from the highest common factor of the component pure tones (sine waves) of the complex wave. So this percept depends on repetition frequency, exactly as it does for a single sine wave. Just- noticeable-difference (JND) experiments in the perception of pure tone regularly show that a JND in repetition frequency of around 4 Hz is perceivable at around 250 Hz, a frequency which lies squarely within the range of Fx common in human speech (Gelfland, 1998: 296ff.). Perception becomes less fine at higher frequencies, but a JND of 4Hz gives a sensible general benchmark to use as a norm for the phys- iological ability of the organism to discern pitch differences within the range nor- mally utilised in the perception of Fx. So we can identify a norm for the perception of pitch differentials independent of any linguistic context. Innately given abilities of this kind are adapted by the mind- brain when they are integrated to higher structural levels..We have already noted the existence of categorical perception in animals other than humans; what sets our species apart is the exploitation of this ability in the service of language. In order to discover how the perception of pitch may be linguistically utilised, and how such utilisation may alter the perception of pitch, we may begin by investigat- ing the discrimination of lexical items outside of a prosodic context by a native ™ There are diachronic arguments for this identification: see Haudricourt (1954), Hyman (1975) and Blumstein (1991) for some discussion. 586 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 speaker of a tone language. Yomba, a Benue-Congoid language spoken in western Nigeria and in Benin, utilises three level tones (high, mid and low), and has the phonologically felicitous property of possessing many words which differ only in their tonal specification. Minimal triplets exist, as exemplified in (1) where an acute accent represents a high tone, a grave represents a low, and no accent represents a mid tone: (1) ba ‚meet™ wa ‚come™ ki ‚greet™ ri ‚see™ ba ‚hide™ wa ‚to be™ ki ‚thick™ ri ‚weeping™ ba ‚perch™ wa ‚us™ ki ‚praise™ ri ‚sink/sag™ A reasonable first pass at a phonological analysis of these contrasts in ‚elemental™ terms might propose that element [H] subtends high tone as [L] does low, while mid- tone is not specified. Though couched in rather different representational terms, this would so far align with Pulleyblank™s (1986) analysis of these tonal contrasts. In Yomba, both low and high tones survive vowel-deletion, while mid-tone does not; ‚mid™ also disappears in the presence of a floating high tone. Both these phenomena are cited by Pulleyblank (1986: 107-123) as evidence for the ‚underspecification™ of mid-tone. Several other asymmetries present themselves in the tonology of Yomba and related west African languages (see e.g., Harrison, 1999: 172-174), but further discussion of the phonology of lexical tone will be postponed until after the presen- tation of the present experimental results. Having analysed the acoustic makeup of one of the sets in (l), it is possible to synthesise several tokens of the words which differ in the single parameter of funda- mental frequency (Fx), play them to speakers of the language, and investigate their reactions. Although productions of these words outside of a syntactic context are never going to be entirely natural, they do at least have the dual benefit of being completely linguistically plausible and putatively contrasting solely on the target parameter. We will see that things do not turn out to be quite this simple, because more than one acoustic factor may be found to correlate with a single phonological object. The shape of the Fx contour, among other things, may act as a cue in addi- tion to the manipulated value of Fx in Hz. We may find cause for further trepidation in the malleable manifested character of tones in connected speech. In the face of this, can it be reasonable to isolate tonally specified syllables for testing purposes ? There are at least three justifications for this. The first was gained from preliminary discussions with a Yoruba informant before testing began.* His intuitions were that it is perfectly well possible to distin- guish words of Yoruba outside of any contextual frame, and the outcome of the tests, as we will see, appear to show that he is part right and part wrong. The second jus- tification is found in assertions by Siertsema (1959) and Bakare (1995) that ﬁshort syllabic utterances . . . constitute the most frequent structure in the Yoriiba languageﬂ Extra encouragement was provided by the knowledge that Professor OyUdldC, in addition to being possessed of native-speaker intuitions, is a linguist and an author of several texts on the YoriibB lan- guage. P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581-616 581 (Bakare, 1995: 54). This rather mysterious proposal by Yoruba scholars can perhaps best be construed as an indication that the language is, relative to other languages, richly strewn with prosodic boundaries, an idea that will become crucially relevant to the asymmetries in perception that are exposed by our test results. If this construal is correct, then it means that isolated syllables of Yomba may be comparatively invariant in citation and connected speech forms. Thirdly, the case for a necessarily relative perception of pitch-cued tones is undermined by the fact that strings of iden- tical tones can be readily identified by a native speaker ﬁin the absence of a syntag- matic comparisonﬂ (Ladd, 1996: 61). However, we should be aware that context indubitably does influence the charac- ter of tones. Connell and Ladd (1990) report an extensive investigation of the differ- ing realisations of Yoruba high, mid and low tones in running speech against a back- drop of various downtrends, which in their terms range from ‚phonetic™ declination to ‚phonological™ downstep. Contiguous tones also have predictable local effects under certain circumstances, as the data in their paper show. For example, an initial high tone will be realised with level pitch, while after a low tone, high may be sig- nalled by a rise (Connell and Ladd, 1990: 6). Connell and Ladd finally have to remain non-committal about the nature of these phenomena: ﬁwe cannot hope to shed any light on the systematic relationship between these effects, much less to ascribe them to phonological rules or phonetic realisation processesﬂ (Connell and Ladd, 1990: 20). Because of this unequivocal statement that their findings are not aligned with phonology, it is impossible to directly correlate our points of view. Meanwhile we acknowledge that we are dealing, in these present tests, with tokens of ‚citation forms™, and it will be interesting, in the light of the polymorphic mani- festations of tone-specified words in connected speech, to see if these are sufficient to cue perception of lexical items. 3.2. Recording and analysis of stimuli Recordings were made of natural utterances of the following three words of Yomba which differ only in tonal specification: (2) ki ki ki (as in (1)) They were spoken by an adult male native speaker of the language. The stimuli were recorded in an anechoic chamber at University College London, using a Bruel and Kjaer sound level meter type 223 1 with a 4165 microphone. They were transduced directly to digital audio tape using a Sony 1OOOES tape recorder and then transferred to files on a Sun computer. Ten tokens of each word were recorded and analysed using the ‚Speech File Sys- tem™ (sfs) software programs.9 These allow, among other things, audio reproduction and a visual display of both the amplitude signal and the spectrograph. All tokens were analysed with regard to duration, amplitude and pitch. Stereotypical speech- 9 Developed by Mark Huckvale at UCL. 588 P. Harr-ison i Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 pressure waveforms and spectrograms for all three tones are presented in Figs, 1, 2, and 3. Fig. 1. Natural token of the Yoruba word /ki/ ‚greet™. Durations for the twenty tokens of mid and low-toned words were found to vary very slightly, between about 205 and 220 ms, while the high-toned words were uni- formly measurably shorter, at an average of about 160 ms. There was also some vari- ation in the amplitude displacements, particularly during release of the plosive, but such variations were only apparent across all the tokens, rather than between the sets of ten. The pitch variation, unlike duration or amplitude, clearly demarcated each indi- vidual word. The average values of the fundamental frequencies (in Hz) at the start of the vowel for each word are given in (3): (3) ki 227 ki 194 ki 149 The productions of none of the words departed more than about 3Hz from these average values. The mid- and low-toned words showed a fall in fundamental fre- quency of 30-50 Hz toward the end of the signal after maintaining a flat pitch con- tour for 60-70 ms. This contour was not present in the high-toned words. From the acoustic analysis above, it can be seen that one respect in which the pitch contour of high-toned words differs from that of mid and low-toned words is P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 589 ils=kin ._ . . . .._..... ‚ime (n 1513 7k Gk 5k 3k 2k Ik (after 60 m of vow sP.8 . . .y. . ...::, Fig. 2. Natural token of the Yoruba word /ki/ ‚thick™. Fig. 3. Natural token of the Yoruba word /ki/ ‚praise™ 590 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 that the former lack a fall. By contrast, the tokens recorded by Bakare (1995) have falling contours only in low-toned words, high toned words are (generally) signalled by a rise, and mid-tones are more or less flat. The focus of Bakare™s work is acoustic/perceptual and he recorded two speakers producing ninety (isolated) sylla- bles,1° without regard for the lexical status of the productions. It is reasonable to pro- pose that both Bakare™s recordings and the present ones suffer to a similar extent from artificiality, and we might go so far as to suggest that a speaker producing non- sense ‚words™ that differ in tone only may take (unconscious) pains to distinguish them (by contour?). While Bakare™s general pattern (high: rise, mid: flat, low: fall) holds across his data, for the ‚real™ triplets [ki], [ki] and [ki], which are the stimuli for the tests to be reported here, his male informant produces a high tone that dips and then rises, with an overall change of only 5 Hz, while his mid-tone actually falls by 10 Hz. Our durational measurements concur with Bakare™s insofar as the high tone is the shortest, though there is a difference in the results for mid and low tones: for his informants, mids are longer than lows, while for our informant there is no sig- nificant difference. A final point to note is that the total number of speakers employed in both sets of tests taken together is three, so inter-speaker variation could still be proposed as the source of any disparities. 3.3. Synthesis and presentation We return to Bakare™s analyses in Section 6, but meanwhile note that having con- ducted extensive perception tests to factor out Fx, intensity, duration and formant cues, he concludes that ﬁthe best single differentiator of the tonemes was the funda- mental frequencyﬂ (Bakare, 1995: 32). This conclusion is relevant to a consideration of the shorter duration of the high-toned samples that we obtained. Bakare™s valuable analysis shows that while duration, intensity, and third-formant values ﬁcombine collectively to the overall differentiation among tonesﬂ (Bakare, 1995: 46) none of them comes near Fx as a vital physical parameter for the perception of tone in Yor%ba. Following this analysis and our own informant™s intuitions,ﬂ the decision was made to factor out both duration and pitch contour to see if significant results could be obtained from manipulating fundamental frequency values only. Of the thirty tokens recorded, one of the mid exemplars was chosen as a model from which to copy-synthesise an artificial stimulus which could subsequently be varied for the single parameter of pitch differential. The chosen stimulus was at the centre of the range of amplitude displacements represented by the samples as a whole and also had a stereotypical duration (212 ms) for mid and low tone. The fun- damental frequency was 200 Hz at onset of voicing, 200 Hz at +160 ms from onset, and 167 Hz at the last repetition of the period. lo There was a carrier phrase, but this consisted of a preceding [s3 p6] (‚say™) followed by a pause, and there was silence after the target syllable (Bakare, 1995: 34), so the syllables were as good as isolated. ﬂ He has stated informally that ‚tightness™ is the main perceptual factor in tone discrimination. P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581-616 591 This signal was imported into the KPE80a parallel synthesizer12 and a synthetic copy was created. This then allowed manipulation of the fundamental frequency independently of any other parameter to create seventeen tokens having fundamental frequencies at the onset of the vowel of between 145 and 225 Hz, each variant being 5 Hz apart. The drop in fundamental towards the end of the word was retained in all cases. These seventeen tokens were recopied to DAT audio tape in pairs, each pair being separated in pitch by from a minimum of 5 to a maximum of 40 Hz. There were a total of 32 pairs, each Hz differential being represented by four pairs, except the 20 Hz (5 pairs) and the 40 Hz (3 pairs). 15 of the pairs rose in pitch and 17 fell. These pairs were randomly distributed across the stated pitch range, and presented (on headphones) in a random order to three subjects, two Yoruba speakers (who also speak English) and one English control. The subjects were asked to say whether each pair represented two tokens of the same word or two different words. In a second experiment, the Yomba speakers were asked to provide English translations for the words. The test(s) on the first Yor+ba speaker were repeated one month later. Though it would be desirable to reproduce these tests with a larger number of sub- jects, it will become evident that the results obtained are sufficiently consistent to act as precursors to the main (infant) tests. 3.4. Results of ‚difference™ testing The results of the ‚Same/Different™ judgement tests can be summarised thus: (4 (b) cc> (4 (e> The English control recognised all and only the four pairs separated by 5 Hz as ‚the same™. The Yor%ba speakers recognised, without exception, any pair separated by 25 + Hz as ‚different™. The Yoriiba speakers recognised any pair separated by 5 or 10 Hz as ‚the same™ with a single exception: for speaker 2 the pair 200-190 produced a ‚different™ response. The results for the two Yor%ba speakers for the 15 and 20 Hz pairs are given in Table 1, where column 1 gives the results for the first test on Speaker 1. On repeating the test a month later with speaker 1, (only) the following differ- ences from his original results were observed. (i) The 225/205 pair was perceived as ‚the same™. (ii) The pair 225/200 (25 Hz differential) was perceived as ‚the same™. 3.5. Results of the translation test The results of the translation test undertaken by the two YorGba speakers are pre- sented in (a)-(e) below: in Tables 2 and 3, row A gives results for the first test on speaker 1, row B for the later test on Speaker 1, and row C for the test on Speaker 2. I2 Developed by Andrew Simpson at UCL. 592 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 Table 1 Results from two native speakers of Yortiba testing for the perception of differences between pairs of YotibB ‚words™ separated by 15 or 20 Hz (S = ‚same™, D = ‚different™) 15 Hz differential Speaker 1 Speaker 2 20 Hz differential Speaker 1 Speaker 2 170/185 S S 1451165 S S 180/195 S S 150/170 S S 210/195 D D 210/190 D S 2251210 S S 2251205 D D 2001220 S D Table 2 Translation test: Total numbers of tokens of each word perceived by A: speaker 1 on the initial test, B: Speaker 1 on the following test and C: Speaker 2 Speaker ‚greet™ (High tone) ‚thick™ (Mid tone) ‚praise™ (Low tone) Total A 24 38 0 62 B 26 38 0 64 C 25 39 0 64 (4 (b) g (e) The total number of tokens of each word perceived is given in Table 2 for all stimuli presented. The discrepancy in totals between the first two tests was caused by a pair 200-190, which the subject could make no decision about the first time. Note that ‚praise™ (low tone) is not perceived at all, a point to which we return in the following discussion (Section 3.6). For every test, each stimulus above 210 Hz was translated as ‚greet™ (16 in all). For every test, each stimulus below 190 Hz was translated as ‚thick™ (24 in all). For the remaining stimuli, the results are given in Table 3. On tests A and B (Speaker 1): (i) For every pair identified as ‚same™, two identical translations were pro- vided. (ii) For every pair identified as ‚different™, two different translations were pro- vided. On test C (Speaker 2), there were 3 deviations in this parameter (9%). 3.6 Discussion of results We begin by summarising, in Fig. 4, the results of the difference testing YorGba and English speakers. on the As is fully predictable from the JND experiments on pure tone previously cited, the English control perceived a different ‚word™ if the signals were more than 5 Hz apart. All and only the signals separated by 5 Hz were perceived as the same. For the YorGba speakers, on the other hand, anything less than 25 Hz pitch difference was not reliably perceived as different. This can be interpreted as suggesting merely that P. Harrison i Lingucr I IO (2000) 581416 593 Table 3 High- and mid-tone perception by Yotiba speakers of stimuli between 190 and 210 Hz. A: speaker 1 on the initial test, B: Speaker 1 on the following test and C: Speaker 2 ~__ 190 Hz 195 Hz 200 Hz 205 Hz 210 Hz High Mid High Mid High Mid High Mid High Mid A 1 2 0 4 4 1 0 5 3 2 B 2 2 0 4 5 1 0 5 3 2 C 1 3 3 1 4 2 2 3 3 2 - English ---- Yoruba 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 differential (Hz) Fig. 4. Summary of average results of Same/Different responses to pairs of Yotibi words differing only in tonal specification by two Yoruba native speakers and an English control. if we use pitch in a linguistically significant way, we expect a certain distance to be maintained between different perceptual categories, and so there is certainly a rela- tivistic aspect to this perception. However, there is also an element of absolutism to be accounted for. A signal higher in pitch than 210 Hz was always, in the translation tests, perceived as an instantiation of high tone, despite the arguable bias against this inherent in the fact that none of the stimuli maintained the flat (or even rising) pitch contour characteristic of a natural utterance. This result suggests that pitch CU~&XV may not be hugely salient to tone perception. Also, at less than 190 Hz a mid tone was perceived. (Low tone is different: we get to this later.) In between 190 and 210 Hz there lies a region in which confusion reigns, as can be seen from the results. An additional factor is that there is evidence that a large differential will prejudice the translation: thus a value of 200 Hz is consistently translated as greet (high tone) if paired with a 160 Hz stimulus, but thick (mid tone) if paired with one of 225 Hz. What, then, could be the strategy for the perception of lexical tone? Neither of the two routines familiar from stop and vowel perception (categorical and prototypical respectively) seems to entirely fit the facts. Evidently, there be no clear-cut numeri- 594 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 cal category boundaries comparable to those developed in the perception of VOT because of the variation of Fx from speaker to speaker, but there does appear to be a fuzzy acoustic boundary@ this voice between the pitches that are mapped to either the phonological object [H] or to the lack of any phonological object (0) (high and mid tones respectively). On either side of this ‚transitional™ area there is a whole range of possible vowel-onset pitches that can be equally well transduced into cog- nition as tokens of a single phonological object (or lack of it), so any hunt for a pro- totype seems doomed. However, it is worth considering the proposal that there may be a ‚categorical™ strategy employed to decode lexical tones that takes account of normalisation. Normalisation may be regarded as an extralinguistic low-level precursor to speech processing, being the selfsame process as leads us to decide in visual processing if something is ‚small™ or ‚far away™. This is supported by the fact that normalisation is acquired extremely early in ontogeny, as attested both by linguists and psycholo- gists. Visual size constancy is already present at birth @later, 1992), and babies recognise their mother™s voice in utero and so can distinguish it from any other after they are born, this being a social rather than a linguistic skill (Fifer and Moon, 1989). Kuhl™s (1979) paper demonstrates, among other things, that six-month olds identify tokens of/i/ or /a/ as members of two discrete and mutually exclusive sets, indepen- dent of pitch contour. Lastly, it is worth remembering that normalisation is also com- mon to musical enculturation. In music, the only other structural system that we acquire from acoustic evidence, ‚Rock-a-bye Baby™ is ‚Rock-a-bye Baby™, whether it be sung in Ab or D#. So plenty of justification exists for proposing that we are ‚nor- malising™ sensory input before we utilise knowledge that is specific to any cognitive structure (such as a language), using the word ‚before™ in both the processing and developmental senses. Normalisation obviously cannot play a part in true categorical perception, since this is by definition invariant from speaker to speaker, and equally obviously it must play a part in the perception of pitch in speech processing, so an unmoderated categorical routine is, as previously stated, debarred from the perception of lexical tone. But once we have ‚done™ our normalisation, the results of our experiment appear to show an expectancy, on the part of the native speaker of a tone language, that a particular part of the frequency range available will be used to signal a particular phonological object, even if the boundaries of that range may arguably be swayed by the surrounding acoustic context. Consider the results in Table 1 (above) of difference testing for pairs of ‚words™ 15 and 20 Hz apart. At around 200 Hz of fundamental frequency there appears to be a prejudice to perceive a change in lexical category.r3 No such preju- dice is evident at the extremes of the ranges tested, where even a 20 Hz differential is more likely to produce a ‚Same™ judgement. We need to align these findings with the consistent perception of lexical change if stimuli are more than 20 Hz distant, and we can do this by acknowledging that tone perception comes about as the result of a ‚post-normalised categorical™ strategy that takes account of acoustic relativity. ﬂ The ‚200-220 S™ judgement does not fit in with this proposal, but it is alone in this respect. P. Harrison 1 Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 595 No mention has yet been made in the present discussion of the most striking result of the translation tests: there is not a single instance, anywhere in the frequency range, of the perception of a low tone. Outside of a prosodic frame, the phonologi- cal object that has low tone as its corollary so far appears to be non-existent. This unexpected finding delivers up an investigable hypothesis that will be used as a new leitmotif for the remainder of this discussion, namely: (4) No low tone [L] is not present in Yoritba nuclei: what has hitherto been considered as the perception of [L] is in fact the perception of a prosodic constituent. Naturally a prosodic constituent cannot be perceived outside of a prosodic frame- work. As this is a fairly radical suggestion, let us see if it delivers any real advan- tages. If true, it means we must rethink our proposed phonology of YorGbB tonal contrasts ([HI versus 0 ver.r™sus [L]). But interestingly, this could well be helpful in delivering a potential explanation of the typological asymmetries in west African languages alluded to earlier. In addition, such a reanalysis may align theoretically with the fact that Sesotho, for example, has been successfully analysed as bearing a single H tone (Demuth, 1993), but there is not a single African language that has been analysed using nuclear L only. It is also worth noting, albeit cautiously, that the acoustic asymmetry of the high- toned word with respect to the others in the present tests, shown clearly in Figs. 1, 2 and 3 (above), neatly parallels the proposal in (4) about Yomba tonal phonology. At least for our informant, linguistic knowledge requires high tone, in isolation, to be realised with an acoustic shape quite different from either of the other surface tones. The experiment described in this section could certainly be extended. There are no controls for the effects of presenting the words in pairs, for any bias resulting from the intervention of a rise or a fall between the members of the pair, or for any change in perception that may be brought about by altering the internal shape of the pitch contour. In addition the lack of any low tone perception may be the result of synthesising all the stimuli from one ‚master™: there could be undetected acoustic properties present in the natural low tone utterances which cue the perception of [L]. It may also be important to carry out some translation tests on single words (perhaps separated by music), and it could be interesting to have subjects rate the quality of various pitches as instantiations of tone(s). None of these interesting potential exten- sions of the adult tests, however, debar our pursuing parallels between adult and infant perception. So for now, encouraged by the accord between the above findings and the typo- logical asymmetries presented by the phonological analysis of African tones in gen- eral, we will add no low tone to the issues we wish keep in mind during the infant perceptual experiments. It is these to which we now turn our attention. 596 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581-616 4. Infant perception experiments We reviewed in Section 2 previous tests that demonstrate the sensitivity of six-to- eight month old infants to language-specific source contrasts in obstruents. If these perceptions map to melodic phonology, they display an attunement of perception to the particular distribution of the elements [H] and [L] in the target language. It has been demonstrated in Section 3 (above) that adult Yomba speakers may perceive the ‚[HI/other contrast for tone without needing a context that stretches beyond a single nuclear domain. If we can demonstrate that this attuned perception of tonal melody is also in place by six to eight months of age, then we achieve some chronological justification for characterising infant perception as ‚phonological™. We will also have obtained circumstantial evidence for the identity of the elements underlying source contrasts in both stop and tonal manifestations. This section describes a series of infant perception tests carried out with this aim in mind. 4.1. Methodology The visually reinforced infant speech discrimination paradigm (VRISD) can be used with subjects of six to eight months of age and allows significant results to be obtained from a comparatively small sample (Eilers et al., 1977; Kuhl, 1993). The proposed apparatus and method are therefore adapted from the experiments reported in these papers. The paradigm comprises a Training Stage and a Testing Stage. The experimental site is arranged as shown in Fig. 5. E = experimenter: V = voter: I = infant: P = tmrent LOUDSPEAKER _) VISUAL t REINFORCEF Fig. 5. Experimental suite for infant perception testing. The aim of the Training Stage is to enable the infant to connect any change in the acoustic stimulus from the speaker with the appearance of the visual reinforcer P. Harrison I Lingua I10 (2000) 581416 591 (hence VR). The VR is an animated toy animal or animals14 in a plexiglass box, vis- ible only when lit: this type of VR has previously been shown to be highly reinforc- ing for infants of six to eighteen months of age (Moore et al., 1977). It requires a 45 degree head-turn by the infant for it to be visible. The infant is seated on its parent™s lap throughout. During the Training Stage, a pair of two easily discriminable stimuli are chosen. These are loaded into the Turner program™ﬂ in the PC, which replays the first at a regular interval of one or more seconds. I6 When the infant is judged by the experi- menter (E) to be calm and attentive, the second stimulus is substituted for the first and the VR is turned on for a few seconds. This process is repeated until the infant turns to look after a change of stimulus but before the initiation of the VR. Accord- ing to the papers cited above (Eilers et al., 1977; Kuhl 1993) most subjects turned at the first presentation of the new stimulus after two or three trials. Once this has been achieved, the experiment can proceed to the Testing Stage. We now choose stimuli whose discriminability we wish to assess. A pair of these are loaded into the Turner program. The first is played through the speaker at two- second intervals, as before. The infant is kept visually stimulated by the voter, who manipulates toys at the child™s visual midline. The VR is now activated by the logic circuit illustrated in Fig. 6 (see Eilers et al., 1977 : 769). TIMER 2 VISUAL /O REINFORCER Fig. 6. Logic circuit for activation of reinforcer during the Testing Stage of the experiment. Timer 1 defines an interval - the trial - during which either a Different (D) or a Control (C) stimulus is presented to the infant. D is the second stimulus of the pair, and C is the first, hence a C option involves no change in the acoustic signal, while a D option involves a change. Each trial is of about four seconds duration. When the experimenter judges the child to be calm and attentive, (s)he initiates a trial. This command also activates a tone in the headphones of the voter who looks out for a head-turn by the infant. The Turner program decides which option (D or C) to choose, and randomises the choice. If a response (head-turn) is observed by either the experimenter or the voter, they depress their voting button. If both are depressed, I4 In these tests, pink and blue drumming penguins were used. I5 Developed by Mark Huckvale at UCL. I6 The interval is adjustable. Two seconds appeared to be the optimum value for keeping the infant attentive: this accords with earlier work (Kuhl, 1979: 1670). 598 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 the VR is activated for an interval defined by Timer 2. Ten trials take place for each pair of stimuli, the randomiser being adjusted so that: (i) there are five D and five C intervals, and (ii) no more than three D or three C intervals are consecutive. During this procedure, both the voter and the parent wear headphones and listen to music to prevent their influencing the infant™s response The tone which alerts the voter that a trial is under way (referred to above) is clearly audible through the music. The experimenter cannot hear the stimuli, or be seen by the infant. The Turner program logs its choice of D or C trial, the timing of a positive deci- sion (button-pressing) by either the experimenter or the voter, and the activation of the VR. After ten trials, it alerts the experimenter that the requisite amount of data has been collected for the stimulus-pair under investigation. The proportion of responses during D intervals can then be compared with the proportion of responses during C intervals. For six trials (3 D and 3 C), statistical significance was said to be achieved in the Eilers et al. (1977) experiment if the fol- lowing results were observed: (i) A head turn during all three D intervals and no C intervals: (p < 0.01). (ii) A head turn during all three D intervals and one C interval: (p < 0.05). (iii) A head turn during two D intervals and no C intervals: @ < 0.05). These criteria are based on a z-test for proportion taken from Bruning and Kintz (1968). Aslin and Pisoni (1980) have questioned the accuracy of this analysis, and propose that at least ten trials are needed to achieve significance. Eilers et al. (1980) have replied in detail to Aslin and Pisoni™s critique, but in the present experiment we sidestep this issue by utilising five D and five C intervals for any pair of stimuli used in the Testing Stage, and we claim significance only if 90% accuracy (nine out of ten trials with an appropriate response) is achieved. 4.2. Subject suitability The subjects, for both the preliminary and the main tests, are divided into two groups. The first group are infants of six to eight months who are exposed to the YorGba language at home, and the second group are infants who are not. This sec- ond group come from either a monoglot English-speaking environment or from one in which, though other languages are sometimes spoken, no lexical tone language is used. Since all the babies live in London, they are all to a greater or lesser extent exposed to English. This is fortunately irrelevant to the experiment, because we are simply probing the effect of exposure to lexical tones in the first months of life (pre- and post-natal), and we propose to use isolated syllables as stimuli: the fact that both groups should be tuned in to some degree to the intonation of English should not bias our results. The sample size is small, but is similar to that which has previously been found to be adequate for this test, i.e. six normally developing infants of the requisite age in each group, who at the time of testing are not suffering from colds or middle-ear dysfunction (Eilers et al., 1977: 768). Introductory letters were then sent to parents of suitable infants, who were contacted by phone after a week or two P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 599 to see if they would be willing to allow their children to be tested. Tests were carried out in a recording studio within the department of Phonetics and Linguistics at Uni- versity College London.ﬂ 4.3. Choice of stimuli Stimuli for the Training Stage of the experiment have the primary function of enabling the baby to associate a change in the acoustic signal with the appearance of the VR. In previous tests, amplitude has been used as a training parameter: Eilers et al. (1977: 773) presented the first stimulus at 50 dBSPL, and the second at 65 dBSPL. After obtaining a head-turn, the dB difference between the stimuli was reduced by 5 dB steps. For the present tests, the first training pair were simply two highly discriminable words, low-toned [ba] (perch) and high-toned [ki] (greet). These were used both for controls and for the target Yomba infants. These two syl- lables differ along so many acoustic parameters that they should be easily discrimi- nated by any trainable infant. In certain cases attempts were also made to train infants on stimuli which contrast solely by virtue of a wide pitch differential (17.5/225 Hz). The success or otherwise of this procedure has implications for the mode of perception that the infant is demonstrating: see results in Section 4.4 below. These Training Stage pairs of stim- uli are additionally useful because they can potentially be used to retest subjects if a lack of ability to discriminate the Testing Stage stimuli emerges from results. Their status as words, i.e. syntactically specified objects with lexical significance, is irrel- evant as there is no evidence that a child™s linguistic development at six to eight months has reached a stage where such connections are integrated. Similarly, although the stimuli for the Testing Stage must conform to the phono- logical constraints of YorGba, their status as words (in the above sense) is quite insignificant. For our purposes, every pair should comprise two stimuli which differ only in fundamental frequency value, the crucial cue for lexical tone. The synthetic tokens of the ‚words™ [ki], [ki] and [ki], previously used for adult testing (Section 3.3 above), were therefore paired and loaded into the Turner pro- gram for the infant experiments, pitch contour and all other potential perceptual cues save for Fx value having been factored out of these stimuli. Individual stimuli have an Fx value (at the onset of the vowel) of between 145 and 225 Hz, and vary by 5 Hz. New stimuli at 230 Hz and 240 Hz were manufactured for use during the infant tests. Higher-pitched signals appear from other acquisitional work to draw a gener- ally more positive response from babies: a parent will often raise the voice-pitch at the start of an infant-directed utterance. It was therefore worth seeing if this turned out to be a form of ‚noise™ in this type of experiment. The stimuli were paired using frequency differentials of 10, 20 or 40 Hz. The pilot study, which aimed to achieve a focus for later trials (see Section 4.4 below), used all three differentials, and the ﬂ To comply with legal requirements, ethical approval for testing was obtained from the Joinr UCLIUCLH Commiftees on the Ethics of Human Research (ref: 96/36). 600 P. Hnrrisnn i Lirzguu II0 (21300) 581416 main study 20 Hz only. I8 Reliable discrimination of any pair less than 10 Hz apart by any child was neither expected nor predicted off our adult perception tests (Sec- tion 3.1 and Sections 3.4 above): such pairs might putatively be used as controls near Fx values which, once testing has begun, seem to be providing potentially inter- esting results for the more widely-spaced pairs. 4.4. Infant perception tests: Results and discussion of pilot study Four preliminary tests, two using a YoriIba infant, and two using an (English) control, were carried out to see if any particular stimulus pairs should be prioritised for later tests. As the time that an infant remains testable is comparatively limited, it was desirable, from a practical point of view, to use any potentially significant stim- ulus pair comp~atively early in the procedure. Adult YotGba perception tests had already alerted attention to a possible perceptual boundary at about 1901210 Hz™ﬂ ($3.6 above), so pairs at around these values would certainly be used. However, at this stage there was no way of knowing whether or not our subjects could even dis- criminate acoustic pitch in isolate syllables, a skill potentially quite independent of their linguistic acquisition. The subjects were trained on the stimulus pair [ba] and [ki]: training appeared to succeed each time, though it usually took between nine and twelve training runs, rather than two as has been previously reported (Eilers et al., 1977; Kuhl, 1993). Following training, a haphazard selection of pairs of stimuli with pitch differentials at 10, 20 and 40 Hz were presented. The results are given in Table 4 (below), where ‚d™ indicates a positive response.20 Table 4 Results of pilot infant perception testsﬂ Hz differential Yoriiba 1 Yorhba 2 English I English 2 160/200 J X X X 1801220 J :: X 200/240 J X :: 160,‚180 :: X X X 190/210 2201240 J :: X X X X 190/200 X X X 2OOj210 X X 2201230 X X a ‚J™ indicates subject interested, ‚x™ indicates a complete lack of interest, and a blank space means that the particular subject was not tested on this pair of stimuli. lx With one or two minor exceptions: see Section 4.5 below. I9 This is of course a post-normalised value. *(™ But not necessarily a statistically significant one: see following text. For the pilot study, an indica- tion of interest by the child, for instance by getting the first few responses correct and then apparently becoming uninterested was sufficient to enable priorities to be set for the tests proper. In neither case did the English subject respond in a systematic way to any of the pitch-differentiated stimuli. Yo&bB infant 2 appears similarly uninterested, apart from in the cases of the highest 20 Hz and 40 Hz pairs, which may or may not have something to do with the relatively high pitch of these stimuli. YotibB infant 1 responded positively to pairs of 160/200, 180/220, 200/240, 190/2 10 Hz and 220/240 differential. This baby did not respond to changes of 10 Hz, or to a pair 160/180 Hz. The positive responses were not always statistically significant (i.e did not gain at least nine out of ten correct responses), but consideration of the results did concen- trate attention for later testing on pairs of stimuli at a 20 Hz distance. This decision was made on the basis of the following possible inte~retations of these preliminary test results: (i) The successful training runs indicated the ability to acoustically, rather than lin- guistically, discriminate A from B. The positive responses from one child to the pitch stimuli indicate that this was the only interested test participant. Linguistic acquisition is not being tested here. All infants can discriminate pitch in a like- wise fashion: there is a tendency to cease to do so at around 10 Hz of differen- tial at this stage in life. As humans grow, they refine pitch discrimination down to the usual 4 or 5 Hz value for JND. (ii) All the babies knew they were listening to language from the training stage. Yoritbri babies attend to pitch differences in isolate syllables, because they are at some stage in a process of attunement which will later map to lexical tone. Eng- Iish babies are not interested in this distinction. (iii) All of the proposals in (ii) are true. In addition, Yotibg babies interpret some pitch differences as phonological while others are simply pitch differences, and hence either less interesting or non-discriminable. In other words, we are obliged to consider what kind of difference the infant is attending to. The notion of pitch-discrimination refinement in (i) above may be true, but it does not really affect the investigation. Physical pitch discrimination may proceed as it will, but its use by the developing mind-brain for the interpreta- tion of cognitive structures is a separate issue. This is underlined by the simple fact that pitch discrimination is adapted as effectively during musical enculturation as it is during linguistic acquisition. Rouget and Schwartz (1970) document a Sudanese musical tradition which divides the octave into seven equal intervals, none of which correspond to anything in the diatonic system familiar to Europeans. A musical grammar is acquired as surefootedly by the unconscious as is a linguistic one, and trained musicians will readily acknowledge the depths of their non-specialist encul- turation: having spent a lifetime experimenting with musical form to a point which discomfited the establishment and occasionally caused physical disruption by aggrieved concert-goers, Stravinsky says ‚I myself have no habit of anything, orien- tal . . . in the Orient I recognise myself as a barbarian™ (Stravinsky and Craft, 1959: 26). Humans parse acoustic signals as language, music or noise: these modalities relate independently to physical acoustic perception, and the first two are interpreted 602 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 via a structural cognitive system. 21 So although our present tests utilise pitch percep- tion, the degree of finesse displayed by the subjects in this ability is only crucial to the enquiry if we demonstrate that it is seminal, in this particular context, to the acquisition of (a particular) language. This brings us to the first assertion of (ii) above, i.e.‚all the babies knew they were listening to language from the training stage™. This is hard to disagree with, unless one advanced the (untenable) suggestion that no language acquisition has taken place at six months of age,22 or the equally unsupported notion that at this age a child has a mature, language-specific phonology. The training stimuli are simply primal CV syllables. If these were not processed as ‚language™ by the developing mind/brain, nobody would acquire a language. Equally, though the syllables do not obey the phonological well-formedness constraints for English words (they possess only one nuclear position), it runs entirely counter to all acquisitional research to suggest that humans are monoglot after six months of life: so much ‚language-like™ acoustic information is encoded in the training stimuli that both English and Yot%ba infants, if they attend, must (unconsciously of course) consider that they are attend- ing to language. Given this, we may be justified in proposing a linguistic component to a subject™s subsequent attention to the Testing Stage stimuli, and to regard a pos- itive response to those stimuli as the consequence of a generalisation of a trained ability. The proposal was advanced (Section 3.6 above) that there is a post-normalised categorical perceptual strategy for lexical tone. If this is correct, then we may claim support for the notion that a child is attending to the phonology of the lexical tone component of the target language if a tendency to perceive ‚difference™ at a certain pitch value were demonstrated. Yoruba infant l™s results give us at the very least a hint that this investigation may be worth pursuing, and that our focus on the 200 Hz pitch value could just be on target. In addition, we take forward to a more systematic set of tests the need to be cau- tious about the following factors: (i) An infant™s attention span is comparatively short and relatively unpredictable, and this should be taken into account, as far as ethically possible, in an attempt to get conclusive results. (ii) It is possible that infants attend to pitch differences without any linguistic sig- nificance. (iii) It may be possible for infants to generalise from a particular linguistically sig- nificant change to such changes in general, which could defocus their attention from the target parameter. *™ The existence of ambiguity in the perception of, for example, birdcalls (music or noise?) does not undermine the discrete nature of the three perceptual routines: it is just that the nature of some acoustic signals potentially renders them available to more than one interpretation. ‚* This idea is insupportable in the light of the assembled research programs cited in $2. P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 603 4.5. Infant perception tests: Results and discussion of the main tests Subjects for these tests were six infants who were living in a YorGba speaking environment, and six infants who were not. 23 The children were between 0:6: 10 and 0:7:25. Age difference within these limits has not been found to be a significant fac- tor in the work we have hitherto considered: Eilers et al. (1979: 15-16) use children aged between six and eight months in their stop-perception tests, and Moore et al. (1977: 330-332) show that while younger children cannot be usefully tested using VRISD, children within these chronological limits show a uniformly positive response. The tests reported here set out to answer the questions in (5): (5) a. Could any of the children generalise from training on a linguistic pair that differed multidimensionally to one that differed in pitch only?. (Our pilot study suggests this is true, at least for Yot%ba children.) b. Could any of the children be trained on a widely-different ‚pitch-only™ lin- guistic pair, and then use this training to narrow down to finer differentials? If so, is this pitch-perception only or is it linguistically significant? c. If a constant (20 Hz) differential were maintained, would any of the children respond significantly differently to stimuli at different pitch specifications? The subjects were therefore all trained using [ba] and [ki] stimuli (as in Section 4.4 above). In addition, an attempt was made to train three in each group using a pair of stimuli comprising two tokens of the [ki] syllable which maintained a 50 Hz dif- ferential, at 175 and 225 Hz. These six children, if the pitch training proved suc- cessful, proceeded to the Testing Stage: if not, an attempt was made to train them on [ba] and [ki] before proceeding. Training Stage results are presented in Table 5. Testing Stage stimuli were paired tokens of the syllable [ki] which maintained an Fx differential as set out below in Table 6, where the results for this latter stage are presented. Table 5 Results of infant perception training using (a) pitch-only stimuli at 175 and 225 Hz, and (b) generalised stimuli (hci and ki)ﬂ Stimuli Yoruba children English children 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 (a) 175-225 J J (b) hd / ki J J J ; J X ; J x J ; a ‚J™ in a cell indicates successful training, ‚x™ indicates no success, and a blank cell indicates that this particular training was not attempted (see text above). 2™ The role of non-Yoruba language input is discussed in $4.2 (above). 604 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 Table 6 Results of infant perception tests using stimuli of 20 Hz pitch differentialﬂ Hz diff. for ki Yortiba children English children 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 140-160 X X X X 160-180 X X 170-190 X X X X X 180-200 X 210-230 220-240 X * ‚J™ indicates successful perception at a statistically significant level, ‚x™ failure, and ‚H™ that, while statistical significance was not achieved, there were some successes (the children may have got the first few right and then apparently lost interest: they did not achieve the requisite 90%). Following his success on the 190/210 Hz pair, Yot?tba child 5 was tested on pairs 10 Hz apart at 190/200, and 220/230 without achieving significant results. English child 8 was tested on the 175/225 pair, again without success. The blank cells in Table 6 are simply a result of having to abandon the experiment when the subject became fractious or inattentive. Some of the ‚x™ cells do not represent a full ten tri- als: if no head-turn at all had occurred after seven or so, the particular stimulus pair was abandoned and a new pair used in the interests of getting as much usable data as possible from each subject. Some tests were also abandoned prematurely for practi- cal reasons. For these reasons, the results are hardly as conclusive as we could wish, but three interesting patterns do emerge from Table 6, even if they can chiefly be assessed impressionistically. The first is that only YorCba children trained successfully on pitch. The second is that, within our sample, it is only the YorCba children who achieve any level of statistical significance during the Testing Stage in their response to pitch differences in isolated syllables. The third pattern to notice is that within the YorCtba group itself, it is only close to the pitch value predicted off the adult tests and the infant pilot study that statistical significance is achieved.24 These regularities merit an explanation. We will consider them in the light of the questions in (5) above. Question (5a) was answered positively for the YorGba children and negatively for the English controls. The target group did attend to (some) pitch-only stimuli in the Testing Stage, and if the proposal, advanced above, that all the babies knew they were listening to language is accepted, then we have some justification for advanc- ing the idea that only the YorGba infants knew that pitch was linguistic. The caveat x It is obvious from the distribution of blanks in the table that the number of tests performed were skewed toward this target 190/210 Hz pair. This was achieved by presenting this pair comparatively early in the Tesfing Stage, before the infant became fatigued or distracted. In practice, this pair was pre- sented either first. second or third. P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581-616 605 that non-linguistic pitch perception may be a source of ‚noise™ in this kind of test has already been aired: in this light, it is interesting that the results do hint at a tendency, possibly independent of the acquisition of a particular language, to attend to pitch differences at a higher register. This may be compatible with the raised pitch-range typically used by mothers to address their young infants to which we have already referred. A precursor to the answer to the question posed in (5b) is that the prediction that only the Yomba babies would be interested in pitch in the context of a single nuclear domain during the Training Stage has been borne out. The two infants who achieved success at a 50 Hz differential did go on to discriminate at least one of the 20 Hz pairs at a statistically significant level. The fact that the successfully discriminated 20 Hz pair lay entirely within the range of the 50 Hz pair could, in isolation, indicate a tuning of the perception of pitch outside of a linguistic context. However, the neg- ative results gained from testing on the pair at 180/200 Hz (and to some extent the same goes for 170/190 Hz and 210/230 Hz) contradict this proposal. We have to acknowledge that it is possible that a mode of perception other than pitch-only is being utilised, and of course the focus of the present enquiry is to see if it is reason- able to characterise that perception as phonological. Our strongest piece of evidence that this is so comes from the answer to question (5~). For the 190/210 Hz pair, and only for this pair, and only from within the target group, statistically significant results were derived. If we align this finding with the proposal that lexical-tone perception is ‚post-normalised categorical™ in nature, and that normalisation is an early (earlier)-acquired, and more peripherally processed extralinguistic capability (see Section 3.6 above), then it is possible to advance the notion that the simplest-available explanation for the results is that the Yoruba infants are perceiving raw phonological melody. Above some boundary value that is acoustically around 200 Hz in the present set of stimuli, and independent of acoustic perception, a different language-specific configuration obtains than that which exists below (about) 200 Hz. The existence of only one such boundary suggests a binary opposition for the perception of tone, rather than the ternary set of phonological cat- egories that is by consensus argued to be present in adult Yoruba. This is at least consistent with the assertion in (4) (Section 3.6 above), which proposed that [L] is not present in Yoruba nuclei, and that what has hitherto been considered as the per- ception of [L] is in fact the perception of a prosodic constituent (or, as a weaker assertion, the perception of an object that is not of the same phonological status as [HI). Like the adult Yoruba speakers, the infants, out of context, perceive the differ- ence between [H] and 0, but not between [L] and 0. A &i-square test can be applied to the total number of responses during trials for each linguistic group, comparing successes with failures. The total number of recorded responses was 297. A successful response is a head turn during a D-trial or no head turn during a C-trial. The null hypothesis is either a random response or no response at all, each one delivering an expected 50% success rate. Comparing responses to the 190/210 Hz pair with the responses to all other pairs, no significant difference is observable for the control group. However, the Yoritba group™s results produce a rejection of the null hypothesis at the p < 0.005 level of significance. A 606 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581-616 contrast is also obtained from comparing results for the 190/210 Hz pair with those for the next most often tested pair, that comprising stimuli at 210/230 Hz. The result for the target group in this case is still a rejection at p < 0.005, but for the control group p > 0.05 (<0.1).25 0ﬂ / , , , All other stimuli 190/210 Hz 210R30 Hz Fig. 7. Percentage of successful responses for each group on (a) all stimuli except the 190/210 Hz pair, (b) the 190/210 Hz pair, and (c) the 210/230 Hz pair. An alternative analysis of these findings is presented in Fig. 7, where the number of successful responses within each of the categories 1901210 Hz, 2101230 Hz and all other stimuli26 is expressed as a percentage of the total number of tests for that category. The story so far inspires both further empirical investigation and the search for support for these findings from independent sources. The latter of these aims requires a re-analysis of YoriIiba tonal typology (see Harrison, 1999: 129- 174). As for further testing, there are several extensions and adaptations to the present exper- imental paradigm that could be made to re-test our proposals, and to see in particu- lar if the temptingly explicable result vis-ci-vis phonological perception could be repeated. 2s Chi-square results: all tables with 1 degree of freedom. Yor3h6 group: x2 Values 190/210 Hz pair ~1 all other results 24.1 190/210 Hz pair v 210/230 Hz pair 24.0 English group: 190/210 Hz pair v all other results 1.4 x i.e., all save the 190/210 Hz pair. P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 601 For example, there could be detectable acoustic properties present in the natural low tone utterances which cue the perception of [L].27 Bakare™s previously-cited work (1995; see Section 3.2, above) does not, however, support this assertion, and suggests that Fx is the overwhelmingly significant cue to the perception of ‚tonemes™. It may also be possible to glean results from similar tests carried out on older infants, or on those who are denizens of other linguistic environments. But first it is responsible to note sources of potential experimental error in the present tests, with the particular aim of improving the reliability of future results from infant perception experiments in general. 5. Critique of the VRISD paradigm The advantages of the Visually-Reinforced Infant Speech Discrimination para- digm over other techniques are made plain in Eilers et al. (1977: 767-768). Among these advantages is the ability to get significant results from a very small sample, a quality that has been exploited in the present work. Because of the attractiveness of the Visual Reinforcer (to infants), VRISD also circumvents the problem of subjects discriminating sounds but being uninterested in the discrimination, a problem which preferential listening experimental routines must take into account (Plunkett and Bryant, 1998: 4). However, during the course of carrying out the tests reported in Section 4, it has been possible to detect certain shortcomings implicit in the method, and to compare this particular VRISD site both with another visual-reinforcement setup and with a non-behavioural test (ERP). ** A comparison of all three is offered here with the aim of assisting the design of future enterprises of this type. 5.1. Shortcomings of the present VRISD paradigm This method has a convincing ability to withstand human ‚interference™ in the recording of head turns. The headphones worn by the assistant and the infant™s carer, together with the randomiser built in to the program, ensure that none of the adults present know if the stimulus changes or not. An extra safeguard exists in the double vote necessary to record a positive head turn. A small problem occurs, however, when the tone is played into the voter™s headphones to alert her to the onset of a trial. This is bound to change her attitude to the infant, who, though focussing on the visual midline, is well aware that the Visual Reinforcer (VR: toy penguins, in the present experiment) could be activated at any moment. The infant™s potential recog- nition of this change of attitude, together with his or her anticipation of the VR, could certainly bring about a head-turn. 27 John Coleman (p.c.) pointed this out. It would be possible to produce synthetic tokens of words hav- ing ‚breathiness™ which could be utilised for the future testing of this proposal. 28 Event-Related Potential measurement. See Section 5.2. 608 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 Another problem lies in the impossibility of controlling for the infant just ‚having a look™ to see if the penguins will come back. This certainly happened time and again in all the tests, quite irrespective of anything that was being played through the loudspeaker. As long as this did not occur during a trial, the procedure ensured that the computer would not log it as a positive. However, it is perfectly possible that it could coincide with a trial, in which case the two votes would be received and the VR activated. Both of these problems are linked with the hyperefficiency of the VR. Once the children had seen the penguins once, it was perfectly obvious from the way they behaved that they knew exactly where the VR was, and that they would like to see it again. The voter™s hardest task was to get the subject to forget about the VR long enough to face forward again, and stop staring at the blank space where the penguins had been. Other researchers (Rivera-Gaxiola, p.c.) have found that some babies are frightened of the VR: this was not a problem encountered during the tests reported here. Even the most calm and attentive subject had, on a good day, the ability to con- centrate on the task in hand only for a limited amount of time. There is thus a dan- ger that, before any of the adult observers becomes aware of the boredom or fatigue of the infant, he will have become wholly uninterested in the speech stimuli and will begin to register negatives to changes he is perfectly well able to discern. This is related to a further problem. Some of our findings show a child scoring correctly on the first few trials and then failing on the last. Here we may have evidence of posi- tive discrimination blurred by external mental events. There are so many uncontrol- lable factors in considering the child™s general attention, including our inability to characterise exactly the relation between adult consciousness and its semi-developed state in infancy, that getting at computational processes from this (behavioural) direction is fraught with uncertainty. Finally, the role of the voter in holding the infant™s attention is not necessarily as neutral as could be desired: being human, the voter understandably forms some kind of relationship with the infant which varies from moment to moment, and so arguably influences the subject™s responses. Future adaptations could be made to the VRISD paradigm to overcome some of the above objections. First of all, it is possible to videotape the child™s responses, and have the tapes viewed and the responses coded by independent observers, a process which is now in use in the Laboratoire de Sciences Cognitives et Psycholinguitique, Paris (Rivera-Gaxiola, p.c.). It is also possible to substitute a non-human device for the voter in order to hold the subject™s attention at the visual midline, and to remove the parent/carer from the suite. Current tests at the University of Barcelona are using a Visual Display Unit (VDU) displaying changing coloured swirls in front of the infant, who sits in a chair, rather than on the carer™s lap (Bosch, p.c.). As long as the baby is calm at the onset of these tests, the lack of interaction with other humans in this environment removes many sources of potential distraction or influence. A sim- ilar VDU device can be used in non-behavioural testing, a paradigm which also removes the problems associated with the nature of the VR. It is to non-behavioural tests that we now turn our attention. P. Harrison I Lingua 11#(2000)581416 609 5.2. Non-behavioural infant speech perception testing Developments in non-invasive methods of measuring brain activity directly by electrophysiological methods could potentially by-pass some of the problems encountered in the present tests. Event-related Potential (ERP) testing as described, for instance, in Woods and Elmasian (1986) demonstrates that voltage at particular sites in the brain can be depleted by as much as eighty percent on the second or third repetition of a stimulus, and that recovery of potential occurs on the introduction of a new stimulus. Measuring infant responses to a passive linguistic task in this way, speech stimuli being played while the child™s attention is being held elsewhere, may give us a clearer view of unconscious processes than has been possible with the pre- sent unmoderated behavioural procedures. One crucial question to face in assessing ERP results is to decide exactly what kind of perception triggers the voltage change. Dehaene-Lambertz and Dehaene (1994) using ERP tests on infants to demonstrate that at two to three months a child will respond to a change from [ba] to [gal within 400 ms, note that their reported ERPs exhibit three different waveforms. Rivera-Gaxiola (p.c.) has gone as far as proposing that ﬁit might be possible that each one reflects a stage of processing of the signal, namely acoustic, phonetic and phonemicﬂ.*ﬂ While it is obvious by now that, in the terms adopted in this discussion, processing stages cannot be subdivided in this particular way, the crux of Rivera-Gaxiola™s suggestion opens up possibilities for a direct approach to some of the leitmotifs considered here. If there is any kernel of truth in her acknowledgedly speculative idea, then babies could be shown to be ‚doing™ phonology, a task impossible without independent phonological primes (and, incidentally, definitionally impossible under the banner ‚phonemic™). Such a demon- stration, while worth striving for, seems to be some way off. Rivera-Gaxiola™s own ERP tests on adults (Rivera-Gaxiola, 1998) illustrate the problems. She first demon- strated behaviourally that a voiced stop continuum running from bilabial through coronal to retroflex is perceived differently by speakers of different languages. Native English speakers discriminate [b] from (alveolar) [d] (categorically), while native Hindi speakers discriminate three items, namely [b], [d] and [cjJ. She then fol- lowed these tests up with ERP studies which broadly showed that while ﬁacoustic sensitivities, categorical perception and category goodness contributed to the wave- forms obtained, . . . covert discrimination capacities were still present for all the con- ditions in these studiesﬂ (Rivera-Gaxiola, 1998: 2). This ubiquitous sensitivity to acoustic stimuli leads Rivera-Gaxiola to hold, among her conclusions, the notion that ﬁthe brain perceives more than the mind canﬂ. We might wish to take issue with the way this is put, as perception is a property of the mind/brain (in the Chomskyan sense) rather than of the physical organ. Moreover, perception, exceptionally, requires no external input (hallucinations, dreams . . .), and as Rivera-Gaxiola points out (1998: 174), there may well be a need to take into consideration some kind of perceptual retrieval system which is used to match to a given acoustic input. What This suggestion was circulated to several interested parties by Maria Rivera-Gaxiola while she was working on her Ph.D. at the MRC Cognitive Development Unit, London. 610 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 will be needed to make ERPs really useful in this kind of test is some more sophis- ticated way of analysing and comparing the character of individual waveforms. In the meantime, it would be interesting to bolt an ERP setup onto the VRISD paradigm, and see if a recognisable style of voltage increment was associated with a headtum. Here, another real problem remains, prosaic though it may be. Extant ERP sensors are cumbersome, and look invasive: none of the parents approached during the present VRISD tests would even consider putting their babies into such a con- traption.30 If the ergonomic design of the testing equipment can be improved, then the advantages of VRISD may be harnessed to the objectivity possible in non-behav- ioural testing. For the present, early acquisitional research can proceed primarily by aligning such findings as are obtainable empirically with the most convincing theories of mind in conformity with Jakobsonian ideals. 6. The present tests and previous experimental work The infant testing program described in Section 4 (above) is the only extant work on the perception of lexical tone in the first year of life.3™ The most substantial report on adult perception of lexical tone in YorGbB is to be found in Bakare (1995 and references therein). We have already discussed the degree of concord (and discord) between his acoustic measurements and the present ones,32 and his work was used here to partially justify both the employment of iso- lated syllables for testing and the sole use of Fx as a variant parameter. We now turn to his perception-testing results in order to attempt to align them with our own. Bakare used three different control groups. In addition to YotibB and non-tone- language groups, which correspond with our listeners, he also used a group of Chi- nese33 native-speakers and a group of trained musicians. He partially summarises his results: ﬁWhen results were . . . pooled across all linguistic variables . . . a perceptual hierarchy was shown in the recognition of the tones, thus: YotibB > Chinese > Music > Naive. Linguistic experience improved accuracy more than non-linguistic experienceﬂ (Bakare, 1995: 37). Bakare™s subjects were required to identify or dis- criminate natural utterances of one tone from another, which is of course a different kettle of fish to the task set to the subjects in the present adult tests, who had to try and identify or discriminate syllables that varied in pitch only, and sometimes by as little as 5 Hz. Bakare™s subjects therefore had a far easier perceptual task. Many acoustic cues (including contour) must be present in the stimuli he uses, and the 3fl It is true that some researchers elsewhere have managed to convince parents of the harmlessness of the ERP setup. Maybe this could be achieved with the London parents, too, given more time to gain their confidence. Nevertheless, it is easy to see why the heavily-wired ‚haimet™ and the process of wetting the babies™ heads to increase conductivity could be construed as alarming to a parent. ﬂ Demuth™s (1993) Sesotho study used production data from a Basotho boy over the twelve month period from 2:0:0 to 3:O:0. j2 See sections 3.2 and 4.5. ﬂ Bakare doesn™t say which ‚Chinese™, but whichever it was should not affect the outcome. P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581616 611 seminal cue, Fx, varies by as much as 100 Hz between high and mid tone (at end of [k^pu] : female speaker) and 110 Hz between mid and low (at end of [su] : female speaker).34 It is unsurprising that accurate discriminations were easier to come by in Bakare™s work, ﬁwithout any help from linguistic contextﬂ (Bakare, 1995: 46). The perceptual hierarchy referred to above reflects the value of non-linguistic pitch train- ing for the musicians, as Bakare says, but does it not also do the same for the Chi- nese group? They could not possibly have been, like the Yot?iba subjects, ﬁassumed to be in a completely linguistic modeﬂ (Bakare, 1995: 47), and were arguably gen- eralising from attuned cognitive skills to attend to the task they were set. As the results show (Bakare, 1995: 36) the Yomba group possesses recognition capabilities that are statistically better than all other groups for both discrimination and identifi- cation. This is the only inter-group statistically exceptionless result: in particular, differences between the Chinese and Music groups are not significant, as Bakare points out, for the discrimination experiment. A real exploration of how far the Chinese group are capable of phonologically accessing Yot%ba tones should use a serious comparison of the tonology of the two languages. To approach this in any detail is beyond the scope of the present discus- sion, but however the six surface tones of Cantonese or the four of Mandarin are analysed, and whatever perceptual routines may be discovered to access the objects which result from this analysis, any acoustic/articulatory overlap between Yor%ba and Chinese cannot be assumed to be complete, or other than arbitrary, without such a comparison. A study of this kind would need, among other things, to take account of the fact that these particular Asian languages differ from their west African coun- terparts in that they possess inherently contoured tones. The conclusion we would like to draw from all this is that it is phonological knowledge that makes the Yot?iba group uniformly superior at these tasks. Two other findings reported by Bakare may bear on this question. The first is the ‚superior left ear™ effect detected in the Naive group of listeners in Bakare™s tests. For normal right-handed subjects, several aspects of language pro- cessing are right ear (left hemisphere) dominant (Kimura, 1961), while music is gen- erally left ear (right hemisphere) dominant35 (Kimura, 1964). Bakare plausibly con- cludes that the Naive group are processing tones non-linguistically, in contrast with the Yoruba group, who exhibit no ear asymmetry. The problem comes when assess- ing the fact that, like the Yombas, neither the Chinese nor the Music group display asymmetry. From Bakare™s point of view, that the Chinese group does not is unsur- prising, but he finds the musicians™ symmetry ‚paradoxical™, and holds the opinion that future testing may ﬁinduce a left ear advantage for both Music and Naive groups and a right ear advantage for Yomba and Chinese listenersﬂ (Bakare, 1995: 48). There is a psychological objection to this. Pitch perception may be mapped to music, language or neither. The possibility has already been raised that the superiority of the Chinese and the Music groups™ results to those of the Naive group is due to a gen- 34 Figs. from Bakare (1995: 41). 35 Like other percepts which, in Jackendoffian terms, may not reach the ‚conceptual™ module (see e.g. Jackendoff, 1987). 612 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 era1 cognitive attunement of pitch perception, even though pitch perception in each case has been enlisted in the service of a different structural system. This attunement may result in a loss of measurable left ear bias for all concerned. The possibility of further testing in this area is an interesting one, as the outcome is far from being a foregone conclusion. One final aspect of Bakare™s findings needs to be aligned with the adult percep- tion test results presented in Section 3 above. Bakare reports the existence of a switch in the perceptual hierarchy for tone exhibited by the Yoriiba speakers. The analysis of errors performed by Bakare revealed that all three control groups ranked the relative ease of tone perception as high > mid > low, ﬁthe natural psychological dimensionsﬂ (Bakare, 1995: 47).36 By contrast, the Yorubri group ordered the per- ceptual ‚ease™ hierarchy high > low > mid. The simplest possible explanation for this asymmetry is the harnessing of phonological knowledge to other cognitive abilities, and the finding supports our assertion that perception by the Chinese group cannot be considered to be phonological. If we accept that the switch is accounted for by native-speaker linguistic knowledge, we run up against the straightforward contra- diction that Bakare™s Yot+ba subjects did perceive the low/mid distinction while the subjects in Section 3 above did not. How may we resolve this paradox? It is possible, as acknowledged in Section 3.6, that our own stimuli lack the non- frequency-related acoustic cues needed for the discrimination of low and mid tones. But at least a part of the resolution of the paradox must lie in the relative ease of gen- eral discrimination of Bakare™s stimuli, and more importantly, his experiments may not focus the minds of his (Yoriiba) subjects closely on lexical items. Since the tests reported in the present work, in particular the translation test, demand attention to the stimuli as words, an assurance is obtained that our subjects are in ‚linguistic mode™. Support for the suggestion that Bakare™s results reveal a different ‚mix™ of perceptual skills from those cited in Section 3 comes from an encouraging parallel found in his remarks concerning his discrimination experiment. Only ﬁthe high tone was better perceived than either the mid or the low tonesﬂ and ﬁthe high tone was significantly different from the mid and the low tonesﬂ (Bakare, 1995: 37). Though the perceptual hierarchy was ‚switched™ in the case of the Yor?rbas, statistical signif- icance was only obtained for the difference in the number of errors relating to high versus non-high tones, not for mid versus low. Bakare™s work concurs with the results given in Section 3 insofar as the discrimination of high from non-high tones is a more robust ability for native speakers than discriminating among non-high tones. The stimuli he uses contain sufficient information to distinguish high tones from others (using a mix of general cognition and phonology), but there is evidently not enough information present to discriminate mid from low at a comparable level of reliability. The switch in the perceptual hierarchy may also be viewed as the result of employing language-specific phonological knowledge in a rather different way that is also consistent with the analysis of Yor?iba to be presented in the following chapter. 3h A similarly non-linguistic explanation must be given for the fact that all control groups found the tokens produced by the female more comprehensible than those produced by the male. P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 613 Bakare did use a minimal carrier phrase - [so peae _] (‚say _‚) - so despite the arti- ficial isolation of his stimuli relative to running speech, there may just be enough prosodic information present to have consequences for some of the perceptual results. 7. Conclusion The original motivation for the testing programs reported in Sections 3 and 4 above was the alignment of lexical-tone perception in infancy with known findings on stop perception (Eimas et al., 1971; Eilers et al., 1979), insofar as both modes of perception could be seen to have developed in a chronologically parallel fashion. This, it was argued, would support the theory-internal prediction of the identity of the phonological objects mapped to by these perceptions. Evidence for this identity might presumably have had to be derived in two stages: firstly, to show that infant pitch perception exists at the target age, and secondly that it is phonological. How- ever, the contrasting results of the Yoruba and English infants have actually answered these questions simultaneously. Training subjects on linguistically viable stimuli, we have argued, must awaken the expectation of linguistic discriminations being possible from the testing stimuli: we owned that ‚pure™ pitch perception may act as ‚noise™, but the results appear to show that this is not so, at least in the present circumstances. The very fact that young Yoruba (soon-to-be) speakers respond at all to isolate syllables with a pitch difference while their English counterparts do not, together with the demonstrated bias of the Yombas to hear change at a single point in the frequency continuum, argues for language-specific influences. The theory- internal claim, therefore, that identical mental objects subtend tonal and source con- trasts is supported so far from a chronological point of view in acquisition. At around six months of age, the language-specific sensitivity to the perceptual cues for [H] and [L] is parallelled by evidence of a developmental change in the minds of acquirers of a lexical tone language. But it has now become essential, if we are to further shore up this claim, to show that YorCba tonology has one, rather than two, underlying lexical tones. Such an investigation, based on phonological distributional facts, is the subject of Harrison (1999: 129-171): as previously noted, there is plenty of evidence to show that in several west African languages, including YorCrba, high and low tone are not phonologically congeneric. The following assertions now appear sustainable, based both on the experimental results given in Sections 3 and 4 and on earlier work: (i) The perceptual routine for lexical tone is categorical (but of course post-nor- malised). (ii) Infants tune into the lexical tones of their native language in the first year of life. (iii) The identity of the phonological objects underlying stop contrasts and lexical tones is supported from a chronological point of view in acquisition. (iv) Given that both the adult and infant subjects were using phonological percep- tion, nuclear [H] and [L] are not congeneric objects in the YorCba language. 614 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 The last of these claims is, from the point of view of our test results, the shakiest, because of the possibility that the perception of [L] may not be cued as exclusively by pitch as is the perception of [HI. In this context, some interesting recent research (Hayward et al., 1998) displays results that suggest that Yot%ba low tone is associ- ated with a different phonation type than that associated with other tones. ﬁOther things being equal, breathier phonation occurs on the H and M tones, whereas creakier phonation occurs on the L toneﬂ37 and ﬁ. . . the H and M tones show a smaller degree of [spectral] tiltﬂ (Hayward et al., 1998: 9). If voice quality serves as a perceptual cue for the discernment of low tone from others, this would help to explain some of the results reported in this chapter, since no adjustments were made for this acoustic parameter. The phonology of Yot+ba tone grouping (and of African tone hierarchies in gen- eral) does not, however, reveal any ‚natural class™ comprising H and M as opposed to L. In contrast, there are circumstances where M and L may alternate, H displays a general ‚robustness™, and a H>>L>>M tendency is manifest under phonological pressure. While there is no obligation on a psychoacoustic system to parallel phonol- ogy, we may expect this generally to be the case if we consider that the mentally- constituted system of phonology has evolved using the perception of sound, and that it is acquired by each human by mapping sound perception onto this evolved system. It is therefore not unfeasible that the different phonetic characteristics of low tone may reflect a different phonological role altogether. Typological corroboration of the results of these perception tests is tirtainly worth investigating. References : Anderson, J.M. and C. Jones, 1974. Three theses concerning phonological representations. Journal of Linguistics 10, l-26. Aslin, R.N. and D.B. Pisoni, 1980. Effects of early linguistic experience on speech discrimination by infants: A critique of Eilers, Gavin and Wilson (1979). Child Development 51, 107-l 12. Bakare, C.A., 1995. Discrimination and identification of Yoruba tones: Perception experiments and acoustic analysis. In: K. Owolabi (ed.), Language in Nigeria, 32-67. Ibadan: Group Publishers. Bertoncini, J., R. Bijeljac-Babic, P.W. Jusczyk, L.J. Kennedy and J. Mehler, 1988. An investigation of young infants™ perceptual representations of speech sounds. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 117, 21-33. Best, C.T., 1991. Phonetic influences on the perception of non-native speech contrasts by 68 and l&l2 month olds. Presentation held at the biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child Develop- ment: Seattle, WA. Blumstein, S.E., 1991. The relation between phonetics and phonology. Phonetica 48, 108-I 19. Bruning, J.L. and B.L. Kintz, 1968. Computational handbook of statistics. Glenview, IL: Foresman. Connell, B. and D.R. Ladd, 1990. Aspects of pitch realisation in Yoruba. Phonology 7, l-29. Dehaene-Lambertz, G. and S. Dehaene, 1994. Speed and cerebral correlates of syllable discrimination in infants. Nature 370, 292-295. Demuth, K., 1993. Issues in the acquisition of the Sesotho tonal system. Journal of Child Language 20, 275-301. 37 The correlation of ‚breathy™ with (at least) H and ‚creaky™ with L might profitably be linked with tonogenesis: see, for example, Haudricourt (1954) on the development of tone in Vietnamese. P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 615 Eilers, R.E., W. Gavin and W.R. Wilson, 1979. Linguistic experience and phonemic perception in infancy: A cross-linguistic study. Child Development 50, 14-18. Eilers, R.E., W. Gavin and W.R. Wilson, 1980. Effects of early linguistic experience on speech discrim- ination by infants: A reply. Child Development 5 1, 113-I 17. Eilers, R.E., W.R. Wilson and J.M. Moore, 1977. Development of changes in speech discrimination in infants. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 20, 766-780. Eimas, P., E. Siqueland, P.W. Jusczyk and J. Vigorito, 1971. Speech perception in infants. Science 171, 303-3 18. Fifer, W.P. and C. Moon, 1989. Psychobiology of newborn auditory preferences. Seminars in Perinatol- ogy 13,430-433. Gelfland, S.A., 1998. Hearing: An introduction to psychological and physical acoustics. Third edition. New York: Dekker. Harris, J., 1994. English sound structure. Oxford: Blackwell. Harris, J. and G. Lindsey, 1995. The elements of phonological representation, In: J.Durand, F.Katamba (eds.), Frontiers in phonology: Atoms, structures, derivations. Harlow: Longman. Harrison, P.A., 1999. The acquisition of phonology in the first year of life. Ph.D. dissertation, University College London. Haudricourt, A.-G., 1954. De I™origine des tons en vietnamien. Journal Asiatique 242, 68-82. Hayward, K., J. Watkins and A. Oyetade, 1998. The phonetic interpretation of register: Evidence from Yortiba. Manuscript, SOAS, London. Hyman, L.M., 1975. Phonology: Theory and analysis. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Jackendoff, R., 1987. Consciousness and the computational mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Jusczyk, P.W. and C. Derrah, 1987. Representations of speech sounds by young infants. Developmental Psychology 23, 6488654. Karmiloff-Smith, A., 1995. Annotation: The extraordinary cognitive journey from fetus through infancy. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 36, 1293-I 3 13. Kaye, J., 1997. Why this article is not about the acquisition of phonology. SOAS Working Papers in Lin- guistics and Phonetics 7, 209-220. Kaye, J., J. Lowenstamm and J-R. Vergnaud, 1985. The internal structure of phonological elements: A theory of charm and government. Phonology Yearbook 2, 305-328. Kaye, J., J. Lowenstamm and J.-R. Vergnaud, 1990. Constituent structure and government in phonology. Phonology 7, 193-232. Kimura, D., 1961. Cerebral dominance in the perception of verbal stimuli. Canadian Journal of Psychol- ogy 15, 166-171. Kimura, D., 1964. Left-right differences in the perception of melodies. Quarterly Journal of Experimen- tal Psychology 16, 355-358. Kuhl, P.K., 1979. Speech perception in early infancy: Perceptual constancy for spectrally dissimilar vowel categories. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 66, 1668-1679. Kuhl, P.K., 1992. Infants™ perception and representation of speech: Development of a new theory. ICSLP Proceedings: Banff, Canada. Kuhl, P.K., 1993. Early linguistic experience and phonetic perception: Implications for theories of developmental speech perception. Journal of Phonetics 21, 125-139. Kuhl, P.K., 1994. Learning and representation in speech and language. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 4,812-822. Kuhl, P.K. and J.D. Miller, 1975. Speech perception by the chinchilla: Voiced-voiceless distinction in alveolar plosive consonants. Science 190, 69-72. Ladd, D.R., 1996. Intonational phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Levelt, W.J.M., 1992. Accessing words in speech production: Stages, processes and representations. Cognition 42, l-22. McCarthy, J.J. and A. Prince, 1986. Prosodic morphology. Manuscript, University of Massachusetts. Mehler, J., P.W. Jusczyk, G. Lambcrtz, N. Halsted, J.Bertoncini and C. Amiel-Tison, 1988. A precursor of language acquisition in young infants. Cognition 29, 143-178. Moore, J.M., W.R. Wilson and G. Thompson, 1977. Visual reinforcement of head-turn responses in infants under 12 months of age. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders 42, 328-334. 616 P. Harrison I Lingua 110 (2000) 581416 Plunkett, K. and P. Bryant, 1998. Phonological processes in early language acquisition. Research pro- posal, Department of Experimental Psychology, Oxford. Pulleyblank, D., 1986. Tone in lexical phonology. Dordrecht: Reidel. Rivera-Gaxiola, M., 1998. Electrophysical correlates of cross-linguistic speech perception in adult native English speakers. Ph.D. dissertation, University College London. Rouget, G. and J. Schwartz, 1970. Echanges et communications 1. Paris: Mouton. Schane, S., 1984. The fundamentals of particle phonology. Phonology Yearbook 1, 129-155. Siertsema, B., 1959. Problems of phonetic interpretation II: Long vowels in a tone language. Lingua 8, 42-64. Slater, A., 1992. The visual constancies in early infancy. The Irish Journal of Psychology 13, 411424. Stravinsky, I. and R. Craft, 1959. Conversations with Igor Stravinsky. London: Faber and Faber. Werker, J. and C.E. Lalonde, 1988. Cross-language speech perception: Initial capabilities and develop- mental change. Developmental Psychology 24, 672-683. Woods, D.L. and R. Elmasian, 1986. The habituation of event-related potentials to speech sounds and tones. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 65, 447-459. 