ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 617-626 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Book review Josep Quer, Mood at the Interface. Doctoral dissertation, University of Utrecht, LOT dissertations in Linguistics. HAG: The Hague, 1998. Reviewed by Paula Kempchinsky, Department of Spanish and Portuguese, Uni- versity of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52245, USA. The syntax and semantics of subjunctive clauses have long been a topic of con- siderable interest in both traditional and generative approaches to the grammar of the Romance languages; within the subfield of principles and parameters syntax and semantic approaches which feed into that model, they have been a recurrent subject of study since the earliest days. At one time or another different subsets of subjunc- tive clauses have received greater attention than others. Thus, Farkas™ (1982) disser- tation on the semantic properties of subjunctive relative clauses in Romanian was the defining study on subjunctive relatives for a number of years, while in the mid eight- ies the spotlight was on subjunctive complement clauses, particularly with respect to binding phenomena; this topic was revisited in the nineties. With the exception of Farkas™ study however, most of this work has focused on the syntactic characteriza- tion of subjunctive clauses, albeit with some discussion of their semantic properties. In this book, his 1998 dissertation presented in the University of Utrecht, Josep Quer takes on the task of analyzing the semantic characterization of subjunctive clauses in a range of syntactic contexts: complement clauses to all semantic classes of predicates, relatives clauses, both those with overt antecedents and free relatives, and a small (but tricky) subset of adverbial clauses. The result is a unified view of the semantic contribution of the subjunctive mood to clausal interpretation which suc- cessfully, I believe, cuts across these varied syntactic environments. The main data base of the work is Catalan, supplemented by Spanish when those two languages show a divergence in the use of subjunctive and with examples as needed from other languages, primarily Romance languages. The analysis is framed within the theory of modality presented by Kratzer (198 1, 199 I), but also draws heavily on work on the semantics of subjunctive clauses by Farkas (1982, 1992) and Giannakidou (1995, 1997a,b). Indeed, the author™s complete familiarity with previous work in this area and his ability to build on these past efforts is one of the strengths of the work. Quer argues that mood distribution cannot be reduced to only one factor, be it lex- ical, syntactic, semantic or pragmatic; however, the contribution of the subjunctive mood to the interpretation of the proposition encoded by the clause is consistent: the 037%2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(99)00055-S 618 Book review I Lingua 110 (20001617426 subjunctive mood signals a shift in the model of evaluation of the truth of the propo- sition. The focus is thus on the semantic function of the subjunctive mood in dis- course semantics; in particular, its role in the determination of the truth-conditional content of a given proposition in terms of its informational updating effect on the background context shared by the participants in the discourse situation, an approach that can be traced back to Stalnaker™s (1978) work on assertions. Most importantly for the analyses presented in this dissertation, truth is relativized to models within a context and to individuals, as formalized in (l), which includes the Kaplanian para- meters of the speaker s, the hearer h, the world W0 in which the utterances takes place and a functionf which assigns values to variables; the informational parame- ters are the common ground cg(c) and the context set W(c): (1) Let c = < cg(c), W(c), M, s, h, W,, f, . . . > be a context A model M(x) in a context c is a set of worlds W™~w(c) associated with an individual x, where x is the individual anchor. In unembedded assertions, the individual anchor is the speaker and the relevant model is the epistemic model of the speaker (M,(speaker)). The world in which the proposition is assigned a truth value is the world of reality according to the speaker, that is, W,(speaker). However, intensional predicates and operators - the typical licenser of subjunctive clauses - will introduce a new model of evaluation which con- tains a set of future world; i.e., a model linked to modality, on the standard assump- tion that modality involves quantification over a set of worlds. Following Kratzer™s work (op. cit.), Quer assumes three separate parameters of modal operators: the modal relation, the modal base and the ordering source. Of these, the one which he exploits the most in his specific analyses is the modal base, although his discussion of certain relative constructions in Chapter 4 and his analysis of conditional conces- sives in Chapter 5 also make use of the parameter of the ordering source. With his basic working assumptions and formalism presented in Chapter 1, Quer turns to the examination of complement clauses in Chapter 2. In reviewing the dis- tribution of subjunctive in complement clauses, he notes that there has been a long tradition of distinguishing two types of subjunctive complement clauses, as in Stow- ell™s (1993) bipartite division of Intensional Subjunctive vs. Polarity Subjunctive. Although the syntactic properties of these two classes of subjunctive complements are systematically very distinct, Quer™s claim here is that the apparent dichotomy is due to the properties of the selecting or licensing element, not to the general category ‚subjunctive™ in and of itself. Furthermore, the same dichotomy can be found in the realm of subjunctive relative clauses and in that of subjunctive adjunct clauses, where purpose relatives and purpose (rationale) clauses, respectively, display the properties of Intensional Subjunctive while other subjunctive clauses in these domains show the characteristics of Polarity Subjunctive. The crucial distinguishing characteristic of the two types of subjunctive, of course, is the possibility of altema- tion with indicative clauses vs. the lack thereof: Intensional Subjunctive is strictly lexically selected and the occurrence of indicative clauses in those contexts is ungrammatical. Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 617426 619 Given Quer™s basic claim, that the semantic contribution of the subjunctive is con- sistently the signal of a shift in the model of evaluation of the truth of the proposi- tion, the lack of alternation, and hence the lack of any possible shift, requires some explaining. He assumes (as everyone who works on the subjunctive must do in some fashion or another) that selection of subjunctive complements by certain predicates (volitionals, directives, permissives, and so forth) is simply an s-selectional fact related to the lexical semantics of the predicates in question. The question then becomes how to accurately characterize the relevant lexical property. He considers Farkas™ (1992) proposal that the subjunctive triggering property of these predicates is that they are intensional verbs which are intensionally anchored to the relevant individual (generally, the matrix subject). Thus epistemic verbs, although inten- sional, generally do not appear with subjunctive complement clauses (with the important exception of Italian epistemics such as credere), because they introduce only a particular world (e.g., the world that models reality according to the epistemic modal base of the matrix subject). The empirical difficulty for Farkas (which also holds for Giannakidou™s (1995, 1997a) characterization of subjunctive triggering predicates as nonveridical) is the s-selection of subjunctive clauses by causative predicates such as Catalanfor-car ‚to force™ and deixar ‚to let, allow™, which are def- initely non-intensional predicates: (2) a. Ens van forcar que abandodssim l™edifici. (= Q™s (25) p. 49) us AUX.3PL force that abandon.SUBJ.PST.lPL the building ‚They forced us to abandon the building.™ b. Em va deixar que l™abraces. (= Q™s (29) p. 49) me AUX.3SG let that him-hug.SUBJ.PST. 1SG ‚He let me hug him.™ Quer argues that the way to incorporate this set of predicates into the analysis, and hence the way to properly characterize the set of subjunctive-triggering predicates, is to recognize that what these causative predicates do is to introduce a set of future worlds which represents a set of future alternatives immediately prior to the point of causation. In contrast to these cases of strict lexical selection, Polarity Subjunctive alternates with indicative complements in those environments in which it is licensed, typically, under negated or interrogative epistemic predicates. From the point of view of the book™s main claim, these are the more interesting cases. Here Quer first sounds a theme which he will repeat in Chapter 3: the apparent scopal contrast between indicative and subjunctive clauses in these contexts is simply the result of the differ- ent model of evaluation. The basic observation to be accounted for is that the use of indicative in these contexts signals that the truth of the embedded proposition is pre- supposed by the speaker, as evidenced by the semantic oddness of an indicative complement with a first person matrix subject: (3) #No crec [que els estudiants es mereixen un premi] (= (40), p. 62) ‚I don™t believe that the students deserve (IND) a prize.™ 620 Book review I Lingua I IO (2000) 617426 Epistemic predicates introduce a model of evaluation which includes the set of worlds compatible with the epistemic state of the matrix subject (M,(matrix sub- ject)). These predicates when negated, however, have two possible models of evalu- ation: either M,(matrix subject) or M,(speaker): (4) El dega no creu [que els estudiants es mereixin un premi] ME(dean) (= (67a) p. 79) ‚The dean doesn™t believe that the students deserve (SUBJ) a prize™ a. . . . i jo tampoc no ho crec ‚and I do not believe it either.™ b. 1:: pero jo crec que si . . ‚but I believe they do.™ (5) El dega no creu [que els estudiants es mereixen un premi] ME(speaker) (= (67b) P. 79) ‚The dean doesn™t believe that the students deserve (IND) a prize™ a. . . . # i jo tampoc no ho crec b. . . . perb jo crec que si Because the use of the indicative indicates that the proposition is true in M,(speaker), both (3) and (5a) amount to contradictory beliefs. Thus, the apparent ‚wide scope™/‚narrow scope™ property of indicative vs. sub- junctive clauses, respectively, is an effect of the individual anchor of the model of evaluation. Furthermore, as Quer points out, indicative clauses at a second level of embedding under negation do not display wide scope effects, an unexpected result if mood distribution is accounted for by a polarity/scopal approach: (6) Els estudiants no veuen [que el dega pensi [que es mereixin/mereixen un premi]] ‚The students don™t see that the dean thinks (SUBJ) that they deserve (SUBJ/IND) a prize™ a. . . . tot i que jo crec que se™1 mereixen ‚though I believe that they deserve it.™ b . . . . pero jo crec que de fet no se™1 mereixen ‚but I actually think that they do not deserve it.™ (= (44,45), p. 65) This is not the last example of empirical problems with a scopal approach to sub- junctive which Quer will present. Chapters 3 and 4, on subjunctive relatives, comprise approximately half of the book. Correspondingly, Quer™s analysis of these clauses - in their many variants - constitutes, to my mind, one of the major contributions of this study. Characteristi- cally, subjunctive relative clauses are licensed in the environment of intensional predicates or operators, and this has led several to propose that subjunctive relative clauses are essentially polarity items, licensed by the intensional predicate or opera- tor and (signaling a narrow scope interpretation of the DP antecedent with respect to the licensing element). In contrast, indicative relative clauses are not licensed, and when they appear in such intensional environments, their DP antecedent may Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 617-626 621 ambiguously take wide or narrow scope. Quer argues that this view is empirically and conceptually flawed on several counts. His first argument against this overall picture of things, a relatively minor one, is that indicative relatives do not take ambiguous scope; rather, they always overtly mark a wide scope reading of their antecedent (i.e., they are not associated with attributive readings). He cites two pieces of evidence for this: the ungrammaticality of subjunctive relative clauses embedded within indicative relative clauses and the ungrammaticality of prenominal evaluative qualifying adjectives with DPs modified by indicative relatives, based on Bosque™s (1996) observation that a prenominal qualifying adjective forces a specific reading of an indefinite DP. (There is an important exception to this generalization, which Quer deals with in Chapter 4: the narrow scope readings of DPs modified by indicative relatives in conditional or generic contexts.) Quer™s second argument, and indeed the main claim of Chapter 3, is that the apparent scopal readings associated with indicative vs. subjunctive relatives are sim- ply a reflection of the indexation of the predicative content of DPs to different mod- els of evaluation, ﬁwhich gives the impression of wide and narrow scope despite the lack of structural differencesﬂ (p. 133). He incorporates subjunctive relative clauses into his basic picture of subjunctive as a shift in model of evaluation by building on Farkas™ (1982, 1997) work on the semantic representation of noun phrases. The semantic content of noun phrases is assumed to have two parts: a variable x, and a descriptive condition (DC) in the form of a predicative expression on x. The assign- ment of values to the variable is therefore constrained by the DC; furthermore, the determination of the scope of the noun phrases will be sensitive to the determination of the world or set of worlds where the DC has to be met. The way in which Farkas (1997) implements this is via the use of evaluation indexes which specify the worlds at which the valuation of a given predicate is checked. Quer simply proposes to rein- terpret this in terms of indexation to a model; as before, the model is relativized to a context and to an individual anchor. Subjunctive, once again, will signal a change in the model. Concretely, the occurrence of subjunctive in the relative clause forces the evaluation of the DC of the DP antecedent in the model introduced by the licensing intensional element. For indicative relatives clauses, on the other hand, the model of evaluation is Ms(speaker); therefore, indicative relative clauses must be interpreted referentially. This is illustrated by the examples below, with their corresponding semantic representations: (7) L™Anastasia necessita un argument [que sigui convincent] MEfﬂtIAnastasia) (= (68), p. 129) NEED (Anastasia, [3x: argument™ (x) A be-convincing™ (x)] ) (8) L™Elena IXXeSSita un argUmcnt [qUe 6s COnVinCent] ME(sp),&@lena™ (= (To), p. 130) [3x: argument™ (x) A be-convincing™ (x) A NEED (Elena, x)] In (7) both the variable and the DC are in the scope of the modal element, while in (8) the presence of the indicative signals that the model of evaluation is the set of worlds which is the subset of the intersection of the worlds in M,(Elena) and M,(speaker). 622 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 617426 To further bolster his argument that subjunctive relatives are not polarity items, in spite of appearances, Quer points out a number of syntactic and semantic differences between true polarity items (PIs) and these subjunctive clauses. An intriguing differ- ence in this list is the fact that PIs necessarily have clause bounded narrow scope, whereas antecedents of subjunctive relative clauses have as one possible reading an ‚intermediate™ scope: still narrow with respect to the licensing element, but not clause bounded, as indicated below: (9) Cada professor espera [que tot estudiant seu llegeixi [un article que ell hagi seleccionat amb cura] (= (113), p. 144) ‚Each professor hopes that every student of his read (SUBJ) an article that he has (SUBJ) selected with care.™ (9™) For every professor x, x hopes that there is an article y that x selected with care such that for every student z of x, z will read y Quer bases his final argument against the polarity/scopal view of subjunctive rela- tives on the properties of purpose relatives which, as mentioned above, display the properties of Intensional rather than Polarity Subjunctive. He notes that their inter- pretation is almost identical to that of a purpose clause; further, the possibility of the purpose interpretation is dependent on the co-occurrence of an intentional agent as the notional subject of the main clause: (10) a. Li va regalar una novel.la que el distragues durant la seva convalescencia (= (141, p. 154) him AUX.3SG give a novel that him entertain.SUBJ.3SG during the his convalescence ‚S/he gave him a novel that would entertain him during his convalescence.™ b. *Per casualitat li va regalar una novel.la que el distragues durant la seva convalescencia (= (144, p. 155) ‚By chance s/he gave him a novel that would entertain him during his con- valescence.™ He proposes that the presence of the intentional agent makes possible the introduc- tion of a model of the type M&x), where x is the intentional agent and thus the individual anchor of the model. Note, however, that in this case there is no operator and no ‚scopal™ effects. The subjunctive mood serves, once again, to mark the intro- duction of the shifted model of evaluation. Chapter 4 extends the analysis of subjunctive relatives to free relatives; the main claim of this chapter is free subjunctive relatives are to be analyzed semantically as free choice items (Catalan qualsevol, Spanish cualquier, English free choice any). There is clear syntactic evidence for this: the environments in which free subjunctive relatives are licensed are identical to those in which subjunctive relative clauses are licensed, with the exception of two, and in exactly these two environments free choice items are also excluded: in the scope of negation, and in polar questions. The distributional parallelism between free choice items and free subjunctive relatives is argued to be a function of parallel interpretive mechanisms. Specifically, free choice Book review i Lingua I10 ~2000) 617426 623 items require for their interpretation quantification over a plurality of worlds, and therefore require a distinct modal base from the base world. This modal base may be introduced by a deontic modal predicate such as must, which establishes ~~~~~(spe~er) (that is, ﬁthose future realizations of the actual world according to the speakerﬂ p. 180), as in a sentence such as You must read whatever I tell you to. Alternatively - and crucially, for the case at hand - the modal base may be intro- duced by the element which licenses the subjunctive relative: it is shown that all of the contexts in which free subjunctive relatives are possible are contexts which introduce non-veridical sets of worlds (for example, imperative operators, inten- sional predicates, generic or conditional operators, and so on). Quer argues that it is not the subjunctive morphology itself which introduces the new model; it simply, as in all of the past examples analyzed, marks overtly the introduction of this new model. There are several subtexts to this analysis of free subjunctive relatives, which I will mention only briefly here. One is the claim that these relatives, unlike sub- junctive relatives with an overt antecedent, are always interpreted as attributive def- inite descriptions; both syntactic and semantic arguments are adduced in support of this. Another, which serves more as further evidence in support of the general analysis of subjunctive relatives presented in the previous chapter, is that free choice items themselves when modified by a relative can appear only with sub- junctive: this follows straightforwardly from the previous argument that indicative relative clauses signal evaluation of the descriptive content of the DP in the base model. A considerable part of Chapter 4 is devoted to the analysis of the semantic prop- erties of free relatives in generic contexts, where both indicative and subjunctive are possible and where at first glance the readings are more or less identical: (11) a. Qui detesta el tabac odia els fumadors who detest.IND.PRES.3SG the tobacco hate.PRES.3SG. the smokers ‚Who detests tobacco hates smokers.™ b. Qui detesti el tabac odia els fumadors who detest.SUBJ.PRES.3SG the tobacco hate.PRES.3SG. the smokers ‚Whoever detests tobacco hates smokers.™ (= (107), p. 197) These sentences typically have a conditional reading, and Quer starts by assuming that their semantic interpretation is represented as a tripartite structure headed by a dyadic generic operator GEN. Now since these are conditional sentences, there must be a modal operator, in this case covert, co~esponding to an overt necessity modal operator such as must. Further, the GEN operator needs some kind of restrictor: the difference between GEN and a universal quantifier is that the former but not the lat- ter allows for exceptions (Quer cites here the interpretation of GEN given by Krifka et al., 1995). It is the free relative which serves as the restrictor, and the difference between indicative and subjunctive is a difference of ordering source. The modal base in both cases is the set of epistemically accessible worlds. However, the use of the indicative restricts this modal base to those worlds in which the proposition 624 Book review I Linguu 110 (2000) 617426 expressed by the clause is true, while the subjunctive signals a larger set of worlds which also includes worlds ﬁmore removed from [the] idealﬂ (p. 202). Chapter 5, on concessive adjunct clauses, is a short but quite in-depth study of this one particular case of subjunctive adjuncts in apparent alternation with indicatives, illustrated by (12): (12) a. Encara que no sigui major d™etat, el deixaran entrar although not be.SUBJ.3SG adult of age him let.FUT.3PL to enter ‚Even if he is not a legal adult, they will let him in.™ b. Encara que no es major d™etat, el deixen entrar although not be.IND.3SG adult of age him let.PRES.3PL to enter ‚Although he is not a legal adult, they let him in.™ Here Quer argues that subjunctive concessives such as (12a) are more properly char- acterized as concessive conditionals rather than plain concessives (as already indi- cated by their English glosses); thus the apparent superficial difference of mood in fact is correlated with very different semantic properties. In the indicative example of (12b), the propositions of both the main and the subordinate clause are entailed, while in the subjunctive case only the main proposition is entailed. Thus the sub- junctive but not the indicative variant is ungrammatical in the context of a matrix episodic tense; further the subjunctive variant alone licenses donkey anaphora. Most crucially, subjunctive but not indicative concessives can be paraphrased with a clearly concessive conditional interpretation: (13) a. Encara que arribessin a l™hora, no aconseguirien entrades (= (36), p. 233) even though arrive.SUBJ.PAST.3PL at the time not get.COND.3PL tickets ‚Even if they arrived on time, they would not get tickets.™ b. Fins i tot si arribessin a l™hora, no aconseguirien entrades (= (39) p. 234) even if arrive.SUBJ.PAST.3PL at the time not get.COND.3PL tickets ‚Even if they arrived on time, they would not get tickets.™ There are in fact a variety of concessive conditionals in Catalan and Spanish with respect to their general syntactic shape, but they consistently appear in the subjunc- tive mood, such as parametric concessives, exemplified by the V4zat-V structure of (14) and the relative pronoun + quiera paradigm (in Spanish alone) in (15), alterna- tive concessives of the form V-or-(not)-V as in (16), and polar concessives modified by scalar adverbials such as in (I 7) : (14) Parlis amb qui parlis, recorda la teva promesa. (= (52), p. 237) talk.SUBJ.2SG with whom talk.SUBJ.2SG remember.IMP.SG the your promise ‚No matter who you talk to, remember your promise.™ (15) Quienquiera que llame, no le abras la puerta. (= (73), p. 242) whoever that call.SUBJ.3SG not him open.SUBJ.2SG the door ‚No matter who knocks, don™t open the door to him.™ Book review I Lingua I10 (2000) 617426 625 (16) Li agradi o no li agradi, se™1 prendra. (= (96), p. 247) him/her please.SUBJ.3SG or not him/her please.SUBJ.3SG REFL-it take.FUT.3SG ‚Whether s/he likes it or doesn™t like it, s/he will drink it.™ (17) Fins i tot si m™ho paguessin, no hi aniria (= (11 l), p. 251) even if me-it pay.SUBJ.PAST.3PL not there go.COND. 1SG ‚Even if they paid it for me, I would not go there.™ All of these concessives are systematically excluded in the environment of a past episodic tense; conversely, all of the environments in which they are possible are unquestionably modal. Quer argues that the appearance of subjunctive in these adjuncts signals - as for the case of free subjunctive relatives in generic contexts - the presence of an expanded modal base, including ﬁworlds . . . that are the least likely to verify the antecedent propositionﬂ (p. 259). Because indicative plain con- cessives entail both propositions, then the antecedent proposition must be evaluated in M,(speaker). Recall that it is precisely this entailment which is lacking in the sub- junctive variant. Thus concessive adjuncts are Quer™s final example of the ﬁshift of model of evaluationﬂ signaling function of the subjunctive mood. Overall, this dissertation is a gold mine of data, albeit primarily from one lan- guage. Besides the constructions touched upon here, there are a number of others which Quer discusses to a greater or lesser degree, sometimes with rather intriguing analyses: the representation of complement subjunctive clauses with verbs of saying (with the ‚embedded imperative™ interpretation), subjunctive clauses with factive- emotives, past tense subjunctive relatives in episodic contexts with definite DP antecedents in Spanish, subjunctive vs. indicative relatives with partitives, and oth- ers. As he himself notes in his concluding remarks, this study needs to be comple- mented with a wider cross-linguistic study. Certainly Giorgi and Pianesi™s (1997) exploitation of crosslinguistic differences in making the subjunctive/indicative ‚cut™ with respect to modal bases and ordering sources is a good starting point for this, given the common assumptions between that study and Quer™s work. Quer also has some interesting ideas on the general interaction between the category mood and the computational system. Thus, for example, he hypothesizes that subjunctive is the only possibility for complements to predicates such as volitionals and directives because it explicitly encodes the dependency relation between the selecting predicate and the complement, and such explicit encoding may be ﬁthe cheapest means of encodingﬂ (p. 52). In this light, the use of indicative with negated epistemics consti- tutes an extra cost, validated by the extra information added to the conversational background (i.e. the presupposition of the truth of the complement on the part of the speaker). This leads him to speculate on the absence of polarity-type subjunctive in the Balkan languages, which most plausibly is related in some way to the morpho- logical encoding of subjunctive in those languages: the occurrence of independent functional morphemes in the inflectional/complementizer system, rather than bound verbal morphemes. This, of course, raises the question as to why it should be, given his view of the role of subjunctive at the (C-I) interface, that any language at all encodes the subjunctive with a series of verbal endings, since the propositional value 626 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 617-626 of a clause is generally assumed to be marked in some way in the complementizer system. I do not always agree with some of the conclusions drawn in this book, but I think that its main contention, the consistent role of the subjunctive at the C-I interface, is an intriguing and strong hypothesis: strong, in the sense of empirical reach. As the physicist Richard Feynman once noted, it is only in seeking to (dis)confirm strong hypotheses that real scientific progress is made, and as one who has struggled to make sense of the properties of subjunctive clauses, I am happy to have this book to add to our store of knowledge on the subject. References Basque, I., 1996. On specificity and adjective position. In: J. Gutierrez-Rexach and L. Silva-Villar (eds.), Perspectives on Spanish linguistics, Vol. I, 1-13. UCLA: Dept. of Linguistics. Farkas, D., 1982. Intensionality and Romance subjunctive relatives. Bloomington, IN: IULC. Farkas, D., 1992. On the semantics of subjunctive complements. In: P. Hirschbtihler and K. Koemer (eds.), Romance languages and modem linguistic theory, 69-104. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Farkas, D., 1997. Evaluation indices and scope. In: A. Szabolcsi (ed.), Ways of scope taking, 183-215. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Giannakidou, A., 1995. Subjunctive, habituality and negative polarity items. In: M. Simons and T. Gal- loway (eds.), Proceedings of SALT V, 94-l 11. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University. Giannakidou, A., 1997a. Long-distance licensing of negative indefinites. In: D. Forget et al. (eds.), Negation and polarity, syntax and semantics, 95-l 13. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Giannakidou, A., 1997b. Disentangling non-local licensing of negative indefinites. In: G. Drachman et al. (eds.), Greek linguistics ‚95, 449-458. Salzburg: Department of Linguistics, University of Salzburg. Giorgi, A. and F. Pianesi, 1997. Tense and aspect. New York: Oxford University Press, Kratzer, A., 1981. The notional category of modality. In: H.-J. Eikmeyer and H. Rieser (eds.), Words, worlds and contexts: New approaches in word semantics, 38-74. Berlin: De Gruyter. Kratzer, A., 1991. Modality. In: A. von Stechow and D. Wunderlich (eds.), Semantics: An international handbook of contemporary research, 639-650. Berlin: De Gruyter. Krifka, M., F.J. Pelletier, G. Carlson, G. Chierchia, G. Link and A. ter Meulen, 1995. Genericity: An introduction. In: G.N. Carlson and F.J. Pelletier (eds.), The generic book, 1-124. Chicago, IL: Uni- versity of Chicago Press. Stalnaker, R.C., 1978. Assertion. In: P. Cole (ed.), Syntax and semantics 9: Pragmatics, 315-322. New York: Academic Press. Stowell, T., 1993. Syntax of tense. Ms., UCLA. 