ELSEVIER Lingua I10 (2000) 557-580 On the semantic status of n-words in Catalan and Spanish* www.elsevier.nI/Iocate/Iingua M. Teresa Espinal* Dept. de Filologia Cataluna, Edifci B, Universitat Autdnoma de Barcelona. Barcelona, Spain Received 1 July 1999; revised version 23 January 2000 Abstract This paper provides some arguments for the claim that Catalan and Spanish n-words are not lexically ambiguous. I put forward the hypothesis that they are intrinsically negative expressions, in the sense that they are indefinites incorporated into a numeral meaning 11011, and they are weak quantifiers, in the sense that they are underspecified for quantificational force. I suggest the relevance of a hierarchy of negative items (negative quantifiers / mini- mizers, n-words, and polarity items) determined by the position of these items within a scale of quantificational force. 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Syntax; Semantics; Negation; Catalan; Spanish * The basic ideas put forward here were presented at a UiL-OTS seminar (Utrecht), at a HIL seminar (Amsterdam), and also at a Instituto Universitario Ortega y Gasset seminar (Madrid) in 1999. I would like to express my gratitude to the audiences at these seminars, to my colleagues of the Universitat Autbnoma de Barcelona: J.M. Brucart, C. Picallo and J. Quer, and also to J. Doetjies, J. Hoeksema, J. Mac&, L. McNally, G. Postma, M. Suiier, H. de Swart, and to an anomymous reviewer for all the com- ments and suggestions they have raised to my consideration. A previous version has appeared in the working paper series Utrecht Studies in Romance Linguistics, XVIII, 49-60, 1999, and in the Reports de Recerca series (GGT-99-l) of the Universitat Autbnoma de Barcelona. Financial support for this research has been provided by the Spanish Ministerio de Educaci6n y Cul- tura (PB96-1199-CO4-02) and by the Catalan Direcci6 General de Recerca (1997SGR/00033 and 1998BEA1400131). My gratitude to 0. Fox for improving the English manuscript. * Phone: +34 93 581 1854; Fax: +34 93 581 2782; E-mail: teresa.espinal@uab.es 037%2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00002-4 5.58 M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 1. Introduction N-words (a linguistic term introduced in Laka, 1990) are a set of indefinite lexi- cal items that share the semantic property of being licensed both in negative and in non-negative contexts.™ Some n-words are derived from negative expressions (e.g. Catalan / Spanish ningh / ningtin, from net zkw ‚nor one™), and some from positive expressions (e.g. Catalan res from Latin yes ‚thing™, and Spanish nadu from Latin nata ‚born™). Catalan n-words are: cap ‚no one / anyone™, enlloc ‚nowhere / any- where™, gens ‚nothing / anything™, mai ‚never / ever™, ningh ‚nobody / anybody™, res ‚nothing I anything™, and the lexicalized PP en ma vida ‚never / in my life™. Spanish n-words are: nada ‚nothing I anything™, nadie ‚nobody / anybody™, ningtin ‚no one I anyone™ and nunca ‚never I ever™. In this paper I would like to put forward the hypothesis that n-words are not ambiguous from the point of view of logical-semantics, and that both in Catalan and Spanish they are negative expressions and numeral weak quantifiers which have a specified negative property and an underspecified quantificational property. The analysis that I shall present is based on the hypothesis that a distinction must be made between strong and weak negative items which relies on a difference between positively specified vs. variable underspecified and negatively specified quantifica- tional features. In this respect n-words show a strong contrast with minimizers on the one hand (such as Catalan and Spanish + ni indefinite NPs, expressions which denote a minimal amount, or extent), and with polarity items on the other.2 Further- more, I shall claim that the properties of n-words are semantically dependent, in the sense that they can be absorbed or made prominent under appropriate structural envi- ronments. I will now present these ideas. 1 .l. The data It is well-known that in some Romance languages n-words appear in polar con- texts with a non-negative meaning, among them: yes/no questions (direct or indi- rect), conditional antecedents, restrictive relative clauses headed by a strong quanti- fier, and temporal clauses. This is illustrated by the following Catalan examples: (la) shows the n-word res within a direct yes/no question, and (lb) introduces the n- word cup within the protasis of a conditional structure. (1) Catalan a. Que t™han dit res? ‚Have they told you anything? ™ ™ The hypothesis that n-words are indefinites has been defended by Acquaviva (1993). Sufier (1995). Giannakidou (1997), Peres (1997), Martins (1999). ™ Catalan minimizers include expressions of the following type: ni una dnima ‚lit.: not a soul™, ni un duro ‚lit.: not a cent™, ni un bri d™aire ‚lit.: not a bit of air™. Catalan PI include the indefinite gaire ‚much, many™, and some verbal expressions. Among Spanish + ni minimizers the following expressions should be included: ni una palabra ‚lit.: not a word™, ni un c&ho ‚lit.: not a cent™, ni una pizca ‚lit.: not a bit™. Finally, Spanish PI include: un dedo ‚lit.: a finger™, un pelo ‚lit.: a hair™, and N + a%uno ‚some™ structures. M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 559 b. Si trobes cap paraigua corn aquest, compra-me™1 ‚If you find any umbrella like this one, buy it for me™ N-words can also occur within declarative negative sentences, either in postverbal position, with an obligatory no negative marker in preverbal position, or in preverbal position (with an optional IZO negative marker in the case of Catalan).3 In these struc- tures, known as negative concord structures (NC; see the examples in 2) there seems to be an agreement effect between the negative marker and the n-words or between the n-words themselves.4 (2) Catalan a. No ha vist ningli ‚(S)he has not seen anybody™ (not . . . nobody) b. Ningti (no) ha vist res ‚Nobody Jlas seen anything™ (nobody not . nothing) c. A NINGU (no) ha vist ‚(S)he has seen nobody™ (nobody not) N-words can also occur in the context of a trigger of expletive negation (EN).5 Interestingly, in this context n-words can be licensed with a non-negative value (compare the expletiveness of ningh / nadie in 3b to the expletiveness of the nega- tive marker in 3a), and they can also be licensed with a negative meaning (when n- words co-occur with the negative marker within a NC structure, as in 3~). The fol- lowing Catalan examples, with the corresponding standard Spanish form, are relevant in order to illustrate these claims. 3 In fact, this is a major difference between Catalan and Spanish. There is compatibility between the negative item (negative quantifiers, minimizers or n-words) and the negative head no in preverbal posi- tion in Catalan, but not in standard Spanish. See Sol& (1973) and Espinal (199 1, 1999, forthcoming) for a description of negation in Catalan; see Llorens (1929), Bosque (1980), and SBnchez (1999) for a description of negation in Spanish. See also Martins (1999) for a summary of the most relevant facts rel- ative to Old and Modem Romance with regard to the co-occurrence of preverbal negative indefinites with a negative marker, and the licensing of negative indefinites in non-negative polar (or modal) con- texts. 4 NC is a phenomenon of multiple negation, according to which a combination of various negative constifuents within a single clause (either a negative marker plus one or several n-words, or a negative marker plus a ni minimizer expression, or a combination of n-words and minimizers in pre and postver- bal positions) is indicating that the clause must be interpreted negatively, but at the level of LF one sin- gle negation must be licensed. ™ By the term EN, several authors (Vendryes, 1950; Martin, 1984; Muller, 1991) refer to an expletive use of negation, in the sense that within a given structure there is a negative item (usually, the marker of sentential negation) which does not modify the truth value of the proposition in which it appears. I would say (following previous work, Espinal, 1992) that EN is a semantic effect obtained at the level of LF when the negative property of specific syntactic constituents (either the negative marker no, or an n- word) occuring within some very specific syntactic conditions is absorbed by the logical specifications of another expression provided within the context. In (3) the verbs dubtar / dudar ‚doubt™ would be the triggers of EN. 560 M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 (3) Catalan I Spanish6 a. Dubto que no mengi ‚I doubt that he eats™ (doubt not) Dudo que coma (EN) b. Dubto que ning& sapiga la solucio de1 problema (EN) ‚I doubt that anybody knows the solution to this problem™ (doubt . nobody) Dudo que sepa nadie la solution de1 problema c. Dubto que ningi no sapiga la solucio de1 problema (NC) ‚I doubt that nobody knows the solution to this problem™ (doubt . . . nobody not) Dudo que haya alguien que 110 sepa la solution de1 problema 2. Previous analyses The existence of the sort of phenomena illustrated in (l), (2) and (3) raises the interesting question of which is the semantic nature of n-words in these languages, whether they are negative polarity items (Bosque, 1980; Laka, 1990) negative quan- tifiers (Zanuttini, 1991; Haegeman and Zanuttini, 1991), or negative indefinites (Acquaviva, 1993; Ladusaw, 1992). It also raises the question of which are the neg- ative and non-negative licensing conditions of negative items (Quer, 1993, 1998; Giannakidou and Quer, 1997). In order to provide an answer to the first question, which is the immediate goal of this paper, several tests - listed in (4) - have been considered in the literature (Horn, 1972; Hoeksema, 1983; Laka, 1990, 1993; Quer, 1993; Zanuttini, 1991). The rele- vance of these tests is based on an analysis of the structural positions in which they may occur and on an analysis of the scope relations in which they are involved within a well-formed grammatical structure. (4) a. ability to occur in isolation b. ability to be modified by almost or absolutely c. ability to occur in preverbal position d. ability to appear in polar contexts with a nonnegative value (yes/no ques- tions, conditional if clauses) Having recourse to these tests, Vallduvi (1994: 270-280) was able to provide a detailed comparison between the syntactic behavior of n-words, minimizers, and 6 As pointed out to me by I. Bosque (personal communication), the negative marker non was used and interpreted expletively in this sort of structure in Old Spanish at least until the XV century. Similarly, Old Spanish used to have the structure illustrated by means of an example such as (3~) in Modem Cata- lan, but nowadays they are rarely accepted. See Llorens (1929). Wagenaar (1930) and Sanchez (1999). The reader should notice that examples (3a) and (3b), with an explicit negative item, can also be interpreted negatively. This interpretation is made explicit when the complement clause appears in a clefted structural position (C. Picallo, p.c.). M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 561 polarity items (henceforth PI) in Catalan and Spanish. His results are shown in Tables 1 and 2. Table 1 Catalan (Vallduvi 1994: 275) n-words minimizers (+ ni) PI (gaire) a yes yes no b yes yes no C yes yes no d yes no yes Table 2 Spanish (Vallduvi 1994: 280) n-words minimizers (+ ni) PI (- ni min.; N a&m) a yes yes no b yes yes 
no C yes yes no d no no yes According to tests a, b, c, n-words in both languages behave like minimizers, which seems to suggest that they are fully negative expressions: they can occur in isolation (where they have a negative interpretation), they allow modification by almost / absolutely (ﬁa test for universal quantification that gets through in negative structuresﬂ; Quer, 1998: 254), and they can occur in preverbal position - with a negative value - without an explicit adverbial negative marker. On the other hand, if we consider test d, Catalan n-words (see the data in 1) share the ability to occur in non-negative polar contexts with polarity items, and in this context they have a non- negative meaning. Therefore, two different interpretations of n-words appear to coexist. In fact, it is worth noting that the issue of the interpretation of n-words has received considerable attention in the literature. I will mainly focus on two different hypotheses, which - following Vallduvi (1994) - will be named Hypothesis A and Hypothesis B. Hypothesis A basically claims that n-words are negative universal quantifiers, whereas Hypothesis B claims that they are non-negative existential quantifiers. Both these hypotheses were worked out during the preminimalist pro- gram and rely on an optimistic raising approach.7 (5) a. Hypothesis A. (Zanuttini, 1991, Haegeman and Zanuttini, 1991) N-words are inherently negative expressions which have the properties of universal quantifiers: [Yx,]. Syntactically, these n-words are affected by an 7 It is tempting to study how negative concord is to be dealt with within the minimalist program (e.g. Watanabe, 1997; Espinal, 1997; Martins, 1998; kac, 1999; Matos, 1999), but since this is not the cen- tral topic of this paper I leave it for further research. Recently, Acquaviva (1999) has postulated two types of licensing mechanisms for Italian n-words: one which relies on transfer of feature content (Chain Formation), and one which relies on feature bundles (Dependency). 562 M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 explicit (or implicit) movement, which raises them to the specifier position of the NegP functional projection. At the level of LF representation these n- words are involved in an absorption operation according to which, when a negative operator has scope over a number of variables, then there is a con- cord effect which cancels the negative meaning. The well-formedness con- dition which controls this NC effect is the NEG Criterion. b. Hypothesis B. (Bosque, 1980, 1994; Laka, 1990, 1993) N-words are polarity items which are licensed only under an operator-vari- able structure. Postverbal NPI require a negation or a negative trigger at pre- verbal position, so that they are interpreted as polarity items bound to a neg- ative operator: [,3x]. All NPI are moved to the specifier position of the phrase headed by negation. This movement takes place, either at the syntax or at LF, in such a way that all NPI are interpreted as preverbal constituents at a certain level of analysis. NC is conceived as a polarity construction. Hypothesis A seems to account for the behaviour of n-words and minimizers with regard to properties a, b, c, since it is intended to account for the syntactic distribu- tion and licensing of inherently negative expressions. Hypothesis B, on the other hand, can be extended in such a way that it might account for the behaviour of Cata- lan n-words and polarity items with regard to test d, since basically it is intended to explain the syntactic distribution and licensing effects of dependent negative expres- sions, and negative polarity is only one type of polarity made manifest in natural lan- guages (Bosque, 1996). This leads Vallduvi to conclude that Catalan, but not Spanish, n-words are ambiguous between a negative universal quantifier reading and a non-negative exis- tential quantifier interpretation.* However, if n-words are considered as negative uni- versal quantifiers it is hard to explain how they can ever get an expletive reading, and obviously this is a problem for Hypothesis A. On the other hand, following hypothesis B, the eventual quantificational force (hereafter, QF) associated with these items remains unexplained. The term QF is used to refer to the explicitness of the quantificational nature of n- words. QF is a discourse semantic property of particular nominal expressions, which indicates the different quantificational properties of n-words depending on contex- tual parameters. I intend this term to mean that n-words, as other indefinites, imple- ment their QF from other elements in the sentence (Diesing, 1992). Accordingly, n- words can occur both external to the VP and internal to the VP (within the nuclear scope), without being intrinsically ambiguous. In addition, this hypothesis supports (1) the claim that n-words introduce a contrast between negative concord languages and non-negative concord languages, depending on the quantificational nature of the n-words employed and depending ﬁon the nature of the (negative) quantifier con- See also Ladusaw (1992) and Martins (1998, 1999) for different analyses of n-words in terms of lex- ical ambiguity. By contrast, Quer (1993, 1998) defends ﬁa minimal hypothesis according to which the negative items under study are one and the same lexical item, the apparent split in behaviour and inter- pretation stemming from the differences in their licensing contextsﬂ (Quer, 1998: 254). M.T. Espinal I Lingua II0 (2000) 557-580 563 tributed by the n-wordﬂ (kac, 1999: 28); and (2) the claim that n-words do not make up a homogeneous class across languages (Deprez, 1997; kac, 1999; Martins, 1999). I defend the view that Catalan and Spanish n-words are variable underspeci- fied for QF, and that the degree of underspecification shows both diachronic and diatopic variations in the domain of Romance, further reduced in Spanish and in some Catalan dialects (e.g. Roussillon Catalan) than in others (e.g. Central Catalan). 3. A new analysis With the above-mentioned data and previous analyses in mind, let us hypothesize a new definition of n-words. (6) Hypothesis C9 a. N-words are indefinite expressions which are incorporated into a numeral meaning 11011 b. N-words are indefinite terms which are underspecified for quantificational force This hypothesis claims that n-words are inherently negative expressions. But, within a syntactic structure, this intrinsic negative property can be expressed either by means of n-words alone, or in association with other(s) item(s) of the sentence (e.g. in NC structures). The definition in (6) also claims that n-words have an underspecified, inherently flexible, QF; its value is not fixed, but is transparent with respect to the syntactic features surrounding these n-words. In this sense, n-words can be said to be weak quantifiers, expressions with variable (a) underspecified features.‚O It is for this rea- son that n-words are claimed to be semantically dependent expressions. 9 Zanuttini (1991) is one of the first authors who presents the proposal that n-words are negative quan- tifiers with two semantic components, a negative and a quantificational element, but Hypothesis C fol- lows ideas initially suggested by Deprez (1997). who proposes: (1) that N-words are indefinite DPs with varying quantificational force, and (2) that crosslinguistic variations are deductible from the differing internal syntactic and semantic properties of n-words, rather than from differences in the structure of the NegP. The main depart from Deprez™s work is that she holds that French and Haitian creole n-words are non-negative expressions, whereas I submit the hypothesis that Catalan and Spanish n-words are nega- tive (see some arguments in section 3.1). The main departure from Zanuttini™s work is that she holds that n-words in Italian type languages are universal quantifiers, whereas I submit the hypothesis that they are indefinites with a variable quantificational nature (see some arguments in sections 3.2 and 3.3). More recently, Isac (1999) has also defended the idea that the contrast between NC and non-NC lan- guages (1) does not depend on the (syntactic) properties of the NegP, but strictly on the differing prop- erties of the n-words employed in a language; (2) this difference depends on the +/- quantificational nature of the n-words employed; and (3) it depends on the adnominal vs. non-adnominal nature of the (negative) quantifier contributed by the n-word. See Doetjes (1997) for this last distinction. lo This notion of weak (which follows Martins™s 1999 development of Rooryck™s 1994 feature system, as applied to a characterization of polarity items in Romance) should be distinguished: (1) from the weak / strong distinction postulated by Milsark (1974) (and later formulated by Barwise and Cooper, 1981), 564 M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 A general motivation for (6) is that n-words do not seem to be lexically ambigu- ous, in spite of the fact that they can occur in different syntactic contexts. In short, I advocate a non-ambiguous thesis and argue for [+ NEG, a QF] n-words, being licensed both in negative contexts, and in polar and expletive contexts. The first part of the definition given in (6) basically claims that Catalan and Span- ish n-words are negative: they are a set of noun expressions which are incorporated into a numeral meaning zero. This means that they are not variables, they are predi- cates of cardinality zero: zero persons (as in the case of ningti / ningtin ‚nobody™), zero things (in the case of cup / nadu ‚nothing™), zero places (in the case of enlloc ‚nowhere™), zero amount (in the case of gens / nadu ‚nothing™) and zero times (in the case of mui I nuncu ‚never™, en ma vidu I en mi vidu ‚in my life™). Following DCprez (1997), (7a) would be the syntactic structure of ningli and (7b) its corresponding semantic value. (7) a. [DP [NW niW4 [NP tilll1™ b. Ilningtill = 11011 (x) [x = persons]i2 In what follows I shall present several arguments that support the two claims expressed in Hypothesis C. 3.1. Arguments for the negative status of n-words Let us first consider some arguments for the negative status of n-words in Mod- em Catalan and Modem Spanish.13 3.1 .I. Argument 1 The first argument is based on the fact that n-words can license, like the explicit negative marker no, ni minimizers in postverbal position (e.g. Catalan ni un duro ‚lit.: not a cent™ in (8b), and Spanish ni unu pulubru ‚lit.: not a word™ in (9b)). Con- conceived solely as a function of the interpretation of the determiner heading an NP, (2) from the weak / strong distinction postulated by Diesing (1992), conceived as a characterization of non-quantificational / quantificational NPs, and 3) from the weak / strong distinction put forward by McNally and van Geen- hoven™s (1998) semantic characterization of nominal expressions, which equates weak with property- denoting. ii In this syntactic representation the presence of numeral features and the lack of definite features would justify that the N ningli moves to the head Num position but not further up. Alternatively, since an n-word such as ningLi can occur in subject position, the syntactic structure of ningli could be assumed to take the form in (i): (i) [DP b n&!&l [NP [Ntllll See Danon™s (1996) analysis of bare numerals. I2 The problem of providing a semantic translation of n-words in terms of ‚zero N™ could be that ﬁthe cardinality zero can only be ascribed to the empty set, and it is both odd from a conceptual standpoint and problematic from a logical standpoint (. .) to ascribe properties such as that of being a set of [per- sons] to the empty setﬂ (McNally, 1998: 373-374). This notwithstanding, I shall assume this semantic analysis the rest of the paper. I3 See Matos (1999) and Martins (1999) for independent arguments on the intrinsic negative status of n-words in European Portuguese and other Romance languages. M.T. Espinal I Linguu II0 (2000) 557-580 565 trast the grammaticality of the following (a,b) examples, with the ungrammaticality of the (cd) examples. (8) Catalan a. No tint ni un duro ‚I don™t have a cent to my name™ (not . . not a cent) b. Ningli tC ni un duro ‚Nobody has a red cent™ (nobody . . . not a cent) c. ﬁTint ni un duro have not a cent d. *Al@ tC ni un duro someone has not a cent (9) Spanish a. No dijo ni una palabra ‚(S)he didn™t say a single word™ (not . . not a word) b. Nadie dijo ni una palabra ‚Nobody said a single word™ (nobody . . not a word) c. *Dijo ni una palabra said not a word d. ﬁAlguien dijo ni una palabra someone said not a word Positive indefinites, in sharp contrast to negative indefinites, cannot license ni mini- mizers that occur within the VP. This argument is especially relevant if we have in mind that + ni minimizers can- not be licensed in polar contexts, that is, in contexts of the type of yes / no questions, and conditional antecedents. (This distribution is recorded in the d column of tables 1 and 2). 3.1.2. Argument 2 The second argument is based on data from the Roussillon Catalan dialect, which show that n-words can appear in postverbal position of negative declarative sen- tences without a preverbal no negative marker. (10) Dialectal Catalan a. Jo he vist ningk ‚I saw nobody™ (Rigau, 1998: 67) b. He menjat res ‚I ate nothing™ c. En parla mai ‚(S)he never talks about it™ If n-words were not specified for a [+] valued NEG feature, these sentences could not possibly be built in this dialect. 566 M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 3.1.3. Argument 3 This argument is based on the existence of a contrast of meaning between a sen- tence with a non-specific indefinite expression within the scope of negation and a sentence with an n-word in the same structural position. Compare the two examples that follow. (11) Catalan a. Ningli no ens ha donat una explicacio ‚Nobody gave an explanation to us™ (nobody not . . . a) b. Ningd no ens ha donat cap explicacio ‚Nobody gave any explanation to us™ (nobody not . . . none) Although truthconditionally equivalent, (1 la) and (1 lb) have a difference in interpretation, due to the fact that they contain different types of quantifiers, either an n-word combined with an existential quantifier or two n-words. The contrast of meaning between una ‚a™ and cap ‚any™ is related to the fact that a presupposition of existence must be drawn from (1 la), but not from (llb).14 Notice also that, apart from the 11011 meaning, there is no other semantic negation expressed in these sen- tences, since whenever it is true that a certain predicate is attributed to ningti, it is also true that this predicate is attributed to zero persons. Their respective meanings could be represented as in (12a) and (12b), and be paraphrased as follows: (1 la) means that for zero x, x being people, there is a y, y being explanations, and x and y are in a giving relation to us; (1 lb) means that there are zero pairs of people and explanations in a giving relation to us.15 (12) a. 11011 (x): (persons x) A 3 y (explanations y) A (x gave y to us) b. llOll< x,y >: (persons x) A (explanations y) A (x gave y to us) The relevance of this third argument is that, following Hypothesis B both types of indefinites, non-specific indefinites (e.g. una ‚a™) and n-words (e.g. ningti ‚anybody™, cap ‚anyone™), should be analysed as non-inherently negative items under the scope of a negative operator. However, the examples in (11) show that n-words are inher- ently negative, and differ semantically from other sorts of indefinites. 3.2. Arguments for the quantificational status of n-words According to the analysis put forward in this paper (see Hypothesis C), n-words do not contribute a variable; they contribute with a [+] specified negative property: I4 I thank L. McNally for discussion on these examples. I5 This suggests that a logical procedure of unification of numeral quantifiers (May, 1989) should apply to a structure with identical quantifiers, and hence account for the concord reading of (1 Lb). How- ever, this syntactic mechanism cannot account for the interpretation of (1 la). See Reinhart (1995, 1997, 1998) for a series of studies on quantifier scope in terms of a combination of quantifier raising and choice functions. M.T. Espinal / Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 567 a predicate of cardinality zero; and furthermore they have, as one of their inherent morphosyntactic features, an [a] underspecified QF which will be activated in accor- dance with structural specifications. I shall show that this QF property must be dis- sociated both from a universal vs. existential reading, and from a quantifier raising operation, since n-words can stay in situ. The next step is to consider some arguments for the quantificational status of n- words, as postulated in (6b). 3.2.1. Argument I The first argument is based on the fact that n-words can combine with the addi- tive degree quantifier m&s ‚more, else™. What is interesting to notice is that me™s can modify cardinal numerals and existentials, but not distributive universal quantifiers. Compare the grammaticality of (13a-c) with the ungrammaticality of (13d-e). On the one hand, (13a-c) require that the cardinal numbers ‚zero™, ‚two™ and ‚one™ are respectively involved in the meaning of the sentences (there should be zero, two or at least one more person invited to the party), and they are all wellformed. On the other hand, (13de) involve the strong quantifiers ‚the two™, ‚both™, ‚everyone™, ‚all™, ‚most™, and are fully rejected. (13) Catalan a. b. C. 
d. 
e. No convidis ningli me™s a la festa ‚Dont™t invite anybody else to the party™ (not . . . nobody more) Pots convidar dues persones me™s, pero no tres m&s ‚You can invite two more people, but not three™ (two . . more) Convida algli me™s a la festa ‚Invite somebody else to the party™ (some more) Vonvida™n ambdues I totes me™s invite both / everyone more Vonvida™n la majoria me™s invite the most more As made explicit by the data, this argument strongly suggests that n-words behave in a similar way to weak determiners (as standardly conceived in the linguistic litera- ture), and differ from strong determiners.16 3.2.2. Argument 2 A second argument in support of the quantificational status of n-words derives from the fact that they show scope effects when they co-occur with other quantifiers I6 Milsark™s (1974) original distinction between weak / strong determiners (and by extension, the NPs containing them) is essentially based on a syntactic diagnostic: weak determiners can appear with a sub- ject NP in there-insertion contexts, whereas strong determiners cannot. See McNally and van Geenhoven (1998) for a descriptive challenge to Milsark™s proposal, based on the fact that no determiner of English seems to be excluded categorically from existential sentences, and on the claim that the weak / strong distinction should not depend on the contrasts non-specific vs. specific, non-partitive vs. partitive, or non-presuppositional vs. presuppositional, but on the semantic properties of the object N. 568 M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 and operators. (In the examples that follow the scope order between quantifiers, or between quantifiers and operators, is specified at the end of the Catalan version, whereas the linear order between these linguistic expressions is specified at the end of the English gloss.) First, being weak quantifiers, n-words show a symmetrical relation when they combine with a definite NP, such as a proper noun preceded by a D. (14) En Joan no ha llegit res ‚Joan hasn™t read anything™ (not nothing) There are two available scope effects for sentence (14), both of which show a quan- tificational reading for res ‚nothing™ : either a narrow scope of res with respect to the definite description (Joan > res), or a wide scope of res (res > Joan). Second, being weak quantifiers, when n-words combine with a positive cardinal quantifier, they are interpreted according to the mapping hypothesis (Diesing, 1992): material from VP is mapped into the nuclear scope and material from IP is mapped into a restrictive clause. This hypothesis accounts for the fact that a sentence such as (15) is most naturally interpreted with tres ‚three™ having wide scope over cup ‚none™, since the former is outside of the VP, and the latter, within it: (15) Tres excursionistes no han trobat cap refugi (tres > cup) ‚Three hikers did not find any shelter™ (three . . . none) whereas sentence (16) is usually interpreted with cup ‚none™ having wide scope over dos ‚two™. (16) Cup estudiant va fer dos examens (cap > dos) ‚No student took two exams™ (none . . two) However, it happens to be the case that strategies for scope taking that follow from the mapping hypothesis are sensitive to some contextual parameters. Thus, for example, inverse scope may be due to the fact that one of the quantifiers is affected by focus, as illustrated in (17). (17) Tres excursionistes no han trobat CAP refugi (cup > tres) ‚No shelter was found by three hikers™ (three none) This sentence is interpreted in such a way that inverse scope between quantifiers is enforced by focus, and the DP in focus receives an exclusion-by-identification inter- pretation (Szabolcsi, 1997). Similar effects are obtained when n-words co-occur with a non-cardinal weak D, e.g. pots ‚few™. (18) a. Pots estudiants no han fet mui faltes d™ortografia @ocs > mui) ‚Few students ever made spelling mistakes™ (few . . never) M.T. Espinal I Lingua I1 0 (2000) 557-580 569 b. Pots estudiants no han fet MAZ faltes d™ortografia (mai > pots) ‚It is never the case that few students made spelling mistakes™ (few . never) Inverse scope may also be due to de ditto readings under assertive intensional predicates. This is illustrated in ( 19).17 (19) (Diuen que es un cas tan complicat que) &quanta metges no arriscarien cup diagnostic (cup > cinquuntu) ‚(They say that it is such a complex case that) fifty doctors would venture no diagnosis™ (fifty none) Third, being weak quantifiers, when n-words co-occur with strong quantifiers, e.g. distributive universals (tot, cuduscun ‚every, each™) and definite quantifiers (els dos, umbd6s ‚the two, both™), the strong quantifier has wide scope over the n-word, quite independently of the syntactic linear order, unless the n-word is affected by focus. (20) a. Ningti no va saludar els dos generals (e/s dos > ningti) ‚The two general officers were not saluted by anybody™ (nobody . . . the two) b. Mui no van trobar tots els desapareguts (tots > mui) ‚All the missing people were never found™ (never . all) c. NINGU no va saludar els dos generals (ningli > els dos) ‚Nobody saluted the two general officers™ (nobody . the two) d. MAZ no van trobar tots els desapareguts (mui > tots) ‚They never found all the missing people™ (never . . . all) Fourth, when an n-word co-occurs with a modal verb, interpreted deontically, the quantifier has scopal order over the modal predicate. (21) El president no pot fer mui res de forma interessada (mui, res > pot) ‚The president is never allowed to do anything in a biased way™ (be allowed . never nothing) And, finally, notice that n-words, as other weak quantifiers, can take their QF from adverbs of quantification: usually, seldom, and often (an original argument put forward by Diesing, 1992). This would explain the contrast between (22a) and (22b). On the one hand, (22a) is well-formed because the adverb of quantification present in the context provides the QF ningli depends on. On the other hand, (22b) shows that an n-word cannot co-occur with an adverb of quantification under the scope of the linguistic expression si ‚if™, because in this context two different operators pro- vide instructions towards the LF building process which are contradictory with regard to the interpretation of n-words: the conditional operator forces a [-] inter- ﬂ I owe this example to X. Villalba (p.c.). 570 M.T. Espinal / Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 pretation for the [a QF] feature, whereas the adverb of quantification forces a [+] interpretation. (22) a. Normalment no truca ningti ‚Usually nobody calls™ (usually not . . nobody) b. *Si normalment no truca ningh, . . . if usually not calls nobody, . . . 3.3. Some previous arguments revisited Besides the arguments presented so far on the negative and quantificational nature of n-words, careful examination of additional Catalan and Spanish data suggests that facts are not so neatly defined as Tables 1 and 2 seem to convey, and therefore the conclusions on the semantic status of n-words drawn from that picture should be reconsidered. 3.3.1. Test a Zanuttini (1991) uses the ability to occur in isolation as an argument in support of the claim that n-words are negative universal quantifiers, since in this context n- words do not behave like polarity items. However, this test should not be interpreted as an argument for Hypothesis A, since cardinal numbers, as well as other weak quantifiers, can also occur in isolation. See the following examples. (23) Catalan Qui ha trucat? Alga I Dues persones I Ningti ‚Who called? Somebody I Two people I Nobody™ In addition, some data will be given below (see (30) which show that n-words in iso- lation can also behave like polarity items. The ability to occur in isolation, therefore, cannot be used as an argument in order to find out the complete semantic nature of n-words. It can be used to determine whether n-words are inherently negative, but not to determine their quantificational status. 3.3.2. Test b In positive declarative sentences gairebe™ ‚almost™ differs from absolutament ‚absolutely™ in the fact that the first one can modify, not only n-words, but also car- dinal quantifiers, as well as free-choice indefinite generics.t8 This notwithstanding, gairebe™ cannot modify existential quantifiers. This is illustrated in (24). (24) Catalan a. No vindra gairebe™ ningti ‚Almost nobody will come™ I8 This observation is made explicit by DCprez (1997: 119-120). b. C. d. e. f. M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 571 S™ha llegit gairebe™ dos llibresi9 ‚(S)he has read almost two books™ Sap esquiar tant, que baixa per gairebe™ qualsevol pista ‚(S)he can ski so well, that (s)he skis down almost any ski run™ *Vindra gairebe™ algal will come almost somebody *No vindra gairebe™ algti not will come almost somebody *No vindra gairebe™ mu persona not will come almost a person In conclusion, modification by means of the adverb gairebk ‚almost™ does not offer a discrete test for attributing a universal quantifier status to n-words. In fact, what this test suggests is that n-words are not existential quantifiers. 3.3.3. Test c Following Vallduvi (1994: 271, 283) PI - in contrast to n-words and minimizers - do not have the ability to occur in preverbal position because they lack a negative property and, therefore, cannot be raised to the specifier position of NegP in order to satisfy the NEG Criterion. (25) Catalan a. *Gaire feina no tint much work not have Spanish PI gaire b. ﬁProblema alguno con Cl no tengo problem any with him not have PI N + alguno However, as the examples in (26) and (27) show, PI are as negative as n-words and minimizers are, since in declarative sentences they can only occur in postverbal position when the context provides a negative expression which supplies the nega- tive semantic property the proper interpretation of the negative expression depends on. That is, they all require a (morphologically or semantically) negative expression in preverbal position, otherwise the structure is completely ungrammatical. Compare the grammaticality of the examples (a) and (c), with the ungrammaticality of the (b) and (d) sequences. (26) Catalan a. No tint gaire feina ‚I don™t have much work™ (not . much) PI gaire I9 Notice that, as soon as Rairehe™ ‚almost™ modifies a cardinal number, the measurability of a certain noun changes to the next lower scale. That is, whereas the expression ‚two books™ refers to exactly two entities which are books, ‚almost two books™ refers to two entities which are books with some pages left, and this expression measures books in terms of the entities they are composed of. I owe this observation to J. Hoeksema. 512 M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 b. *Tint gaire feina have much work c. No tint cup feina pendent ‚I don™t have any work left™ (not no) d. *Tint cap feina pendent have no work left N-word (27) Spanish a. No tengo problema alguno con Cl ‚I don™t have any problem with him™ (not . any) b. *Tengo problema alguno con Cl have any problem with him PI N + alguno c. No tengo ni un problema con Cl ‚I have no problem with him™ (not . . not a single problem) d. *Tengo ni un problema con Cl have no problem with him Minimizer In addition to that, some interesting contrasts are shown in the following para- digm. (28) Catalan a. No he vist gaires estudiants ‚I haven™t seen many students™ b. *Gaires estudiants no he vist many students not have seen c. *No gaires estudiants no he vist not many students not have seen d. NO GAZRES ESTUDIANTS no he vist ‚Not many students I have seen™ Example (28a) is wellformed, since it licenses the indefinite gaires ‚many™ in postverbal position by means of a preverbal negative marker no. By contrast, the set of examples given in (28bd) does not suggest that gaire cannot occur in preverbal position due to the lack of a negative property; rather, it reveals that this PI, being inherently marked as [- QF], cannot be raised to a preverbal position, unless this movement is forced by some structural requirement. More precisely, (28d) shows that the indefinite is allowed in preverbal position, because the whole DP IZO gaires estudiants ‚not many students™ is on the restrictor set of a focus operator. In sum, the paradigm in (28) illustrates the fact that a PI defined with a [- QF] feature specification can occur within a preverbal position, not in order to satisfy an intrinsic quantifier specification (as made explicit by the ungrammaticality of (28b-c), but in order to satisfy some independent structural property of the sen- tence. To conclude, if negative PI do not usually have the ability to occur in preverbal position, it is not because they are unspecified for a negative feature, but because M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 573 they have a negative value for a QF property, that is, they have [-] quantificational nature, and therefore, cannot be raised. In short, prototypical PI have no inherent QF. 3.3.4. Test d According to Vallduvi (1994), the ability to appear in polar contexts with a non- negative value (yes/no question, conditional if clauses) is an idiosyncratic property of Catalan n-words. But, in fact, as illustrated in (29), it is also possible to find Span- ish n-words used in non-negative polar constructions, mainly in rhetorical questions and in the structure nada ‚anything™ I nadie ‚anybody™ followed by a comparative adjective (igual ‚like™, semejante ‚similar™). (29) Spanish a. &Cuando me has regalado nada? ‚When have you given any present to me? ™ b. LHabias visto nada semejante? ‚Had you seen anything like that?™ c. Si encuentras a nadie igual, c&ate con Cl ‚If you find anybody similar to him, marry him™ (Bosque, 1980: 28) In addition, examples like (3b) above are interesting because they illustrate the fact that n-words can occur in EN constructions with a non-negative meaning. Therefore, we should revise the results in column d of Table 2 in terms of Table 3. Table 3 Spanish d n-words minimizers (+ ni) PI (- ni min.; N algum) yes no yes As we see, the conclusion that must be drawn from these paradigms is not that n- words are ambiguous between a negative universal reading and a non-negative exis- tential reading - as predicted by Hypotheses A and B in (5), between a strong and a weak quantificational reading, or between a presuppositional and a cardinal reading. The conclusion should be that n-words are semantically dependent expressions, in the sense that - being [+ NEG, c1 QF] - they are transparent to the features sur- rounding them. They are expressions which are licensed in the semantic scope of an expression z that introduces a semantic property h which their interpretation depends on, and this is not exclusively the negative property.20 ‚ﬂ I assume that the interpretation of polar expressions, either indefinite or not, is controlled by a con- dition on PI-licensing. For the time being, I shall follow Giannakidou™s (1997: 16-17) proposal in (i). which assumes a semantic definition of scope in the terms specified in (ii). 574 M.T. Espinal i Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 Hypothesis C claims that n-words have two properties, a negative property and a quantificational property. When they occur in polar contexts, the interrogative and the conditionai operators neutralize both the negative and the QF properties of n- words. The negativity of the numeral of cardinality zero is questioned or condi- tioned, and I would like to suggest that this is due to the fact that n-words are inher- ently characterized as not being positively specified for QF: n-words are u-valued for QF.2™ To conclude, the preceding discussion has shown that n-words differ from strong universal determiners (see the argument based on the combination with the degree quantifier m&s ‚more™; examples in (13)), it has provided some evidence against the existential status of these quantifiers (see the argument based on the modification by g&r&e ‚almost™; examples in (24)), and it has argued for the [+ NEG, (x QF] char- acterization of n-words. Consequently, if n-words are not strong nor existential quantifiers, we should conclude that they are weak numeral quantifiers, in accor- dance with Hypothesis C. There is still another test, not considered so far, which provides new intriguing information about the semantic status of n-words in both Catalan and Spanish. (i) Condition on PI-licensing a. A polarity item a is licensed iff (a) the context provides some expression z which supplies the semantic property h a™s proper inte~retation depends on, and (b) a is found in the semantic scope of 2. b. L™ is said to be the trigger of a. (ii) Semantic scope An expression a is in the semantic scope of an expression z iff the interpretation of a is affected by the semantic contribution of Z. According to this definition n-words are interpreted as PI when the context provides some expression which supplies either the negative property, or the quantificational property, n-words depend on for their interpretation. 21 In accordance with this discussion, interrogative and conditional operators should also be able to absorb the negative property of other weak negative items, for example PI, since they are positively specified for negativity and negatively specified for quantificational force [+ NEG, - QF]; but the very same operators should not be able to absorb the negative property of the negative marker no, since - on its default characterization - this item is positively specified for negativity and is not specified for quan- tificationai force. Both these predictions seem to be correct. PI can be absorbed in polar contexts, whereas no can neither be absorbed by inte~ogative and conditional operators, nor by most of the set of hcensors of EN (e.g. Catalan ignorar ‚ignore™, negar ‚deny™; empipar, malestar ‚disturb, stop™; the com- paratives primer ‚first™, liltim ‚last™; massa ‚too™; sense ‚without™, en comptes de ‚instead of™; pot ‚few™; rarament ‚rarely™). However, this view is not complete. Other triggers of EN (e.g. t&ner ‚be afraid of™; fins ‚until™; pot ‚almost™) can absorb the negative marker no, and still others (e.g. the comparatives m&s ‚more™, menys ‚less™, estimar-se mh ‚prefer™; verbs expressing prohibition impedir, evitar ‚prevent. stop™; d&tar ‚doubt™: ahans ‚before™) can absorb both the negative marker and n-words. Thus, suggesting that no can be absorbed because it has some feature which makes absorption possible: a QF attribute with a neutral value [+ NEG, 0 QF]. Although I do not have a complete analysis of this variation at present, I am nevertheless convinced that a thorough semantic characterization of the set of triggers of EN, which would complement the semantic characterization of n-words and no, is going to provide the clue to this puzzle. 575 3.3.5. Test e This test is based on the ability to be preceded by the negative marker no in iso- lation. It is important to notice that Catalan n-words have this ability, whereas Span- ish n-words do not, as shown by the data in (30) and (31>.22 (30) Catalan a. Qd vols? (No) res (Vallduvi, 1994: 287) ‚What do you want? Nothing™ (not anything) b. Que tens son? (Noi gem ‚Are you sleepy? No, I am not™ fnot anything) Dialectal Catalan23 (Rigau, 1998: 66) c. On has estat? En no cup lloc ‚Where have you been? Nowhere™ (in not any place) d. Qui has vist? No ningti ‚Who have you seen? Nobody™ (‚not anybody) (3 1) Spanish a. LDesea algo mas? (*No) nada ‚Would you like anything else? Nothing™ (not anything) b. LTe ham6 alguien? (*No) nadie ‚Did anybody call you? Nobody™ (not any~#dy) This is an interesting contrast between Catalan and Spanish n-words. But, once again, it should not be conceived of as suggesting an ambiguity between [Yx -1 and [--, 3x] in Catalan n-words, since there is no such lexical ambiguity.24 It is a differ- ence related to the fact that they are weak quantifiers with an underspecified QF, and to the fact that, with regard to the diachronic evolution (Jespersen™s, 1917, 1924, negation cycle),25 n-words show a disparate status in various languages and in dif- ferent dialects of the same language. Being defined with a variable underspecified QF, these indefinite expressions allow a varying syntactic behavior, in the sense that they tend to lose the PI status and they tend to acquire a QF. In fact, a careful exam- ination of the data suggests the relevance of a hierarchy of negative items, which crucially depends on the position of these items within a scale of QF. 4. Hierarchy of negative items I take it that the proposed hierarchy has the form in Table 4. ?* This is not the only difference between Catalan and Spanish NC structures. Modem Catalan behaves like late Old Romance, but unlike Modem Spanish (Galician, Italian, French, and Portuguese), in the fact that preverbal negative indefinites optionally co-occur with the overt negative marker. *™ This data has been recorded by G. Rigau in the Ports de Morella dialect. Also, Hualde (1992) reports the existence of this constmction in the Tortosa dialect. 24 In fact, there is a relation of logical equivalence between these two formulas. 25 See also Ladusaw (1993) on Jespersen™s negation cycle. 576 M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 Table 4 NQ / Minimizers + > N-words > PI a UP CAT + SPA + + First, this table postulates a hierarchy of negative items, from Negative Quanti- fiers and Minimizers to Polarity items, based on the value specification for the QF grammatical feature. Catalan and Spanish n-words are intrinsically neither [+] val- ued nor [-] valued for the QF feature. Second, this table hypothesizes a distinction between strong and weak negative items based on their quantificational nature. Strong negative items are [+] quantifi- cational ([+ QF] in Table 4), and this class includes Catalan and Spanish + ni min- imizers.26 Weak negative items are either [ct] or [-I quantificational ([u QF] and [- QF] in Table 4), and this class includes CataIan and Spanish n-words, as well as Catalan and Spanish PI (e.g. gaire in Catalan, minimizers without ni and the N + alguno structure in Spanish). As I have been able to show in the text above, proto- typical PI, situated at the right hand side of the hierarchy, can never occur outside the nuclear scope of the operator they are related to and, therefore, must be postverbal. Third, Table 4 predicts that a distinction should be made between minimizers and n-words. It happens to be the case that, from a syntactic perspective, both minimiz- ers and n-words can occur either in preverbal or in postverbal position, but never- theless a distinction must be made between these two types of negative items, since they have a different syntactic distribution: (1) only n-words, but not minimizers, can occur in polar (conditional, inte~ogative or expletive) contexts with a non-neg- ative meaning in both languages (although more restricted in Spanish; see the exam- ples in (29) above), and (2) only Catalan n-words, but not Spanish n-words, nor min- imizers, can occur in isolation under the scope of the negative marker no (see the examples in (30) and (31) above).27 Fourth, Table 4 hypothesizes a distinction between Catalan and Spanish n-words: the feature value speci~cation [a QF] of Catalan n-words is towards the I-1, whereas the feature value specification [a QF] of Spanish n-words is towards the [+I, thus predicting the fact that they can occur in different syntactic environments; that is, 26 Another potential lexical item belonging to this class is the Catalan specifier no pas ‚not™ [+ NEG, + QF] @spinal, 1991), although an alternative analysis of continuous IIU pas as a negative focusing par- ticle is also plausible, as suggested to me by J. Quer (p.c.). 27 The reason why minimizers in both Catalan and Spanish cannot occur in isolation under the scope of no is probably due to the fact that prototypical minimizers have a ni negative marker in their onset structural position (e.g. ni un duro ‚lit.: not a cent™ and ni ma palabru ‚lit.: not a word™ in (8) and (9), respectively). M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 511 they can occur in expletive environments more frequently in Modem Catalan than in Modem Spanish. In other words, the difference between Catalan and Spanish n- words is in the second component of the definition of n-words given in (6b), on their variable underspecified QF, and their tendency towards being lexically stronger in Spanish than in Catalan. Obviously, this quantificational difference accounts for their different syntactic distribution, and I submit that it also reflects their being at different stages of evolution (see note 6).28 Additionally, this hierarchy is relevant with regard to the phenomenon of exple- tive negation (see note 5). It happens to be the case that, from a semantic perspec- tive, strong negative items (i.e. minimizers) cannot be absorbed in environments potentially licensing expletive negation (Espinal, 1992), whereas weak negative items can. That is, it happens to be the case that those lexical items positively spec- ified for QF are the only ones which cannot be absorbed by an appropriate trigger under specific structural environments, but n-words [+ NEG, c1 QF], PI [+ NEG, - QF], and even no - when defined with an inherent neutral QF feature [+ NEG, 0 QF] - can (see note 21). More specifically, going back to Hypothesis C, we should con- clude that the negative property of n-words is absorbable (in conditional, interroga- tive and expletive contexts), because these items are variable underspecified for QF. It should further be claimed that the relevance of the hierarchy of negative items postulated in Table 4 is proved by considering the fact that the co-occurrence of var- ious types of negative items does not necessarily yield to a double negation interpre- tation. Hence, it seems that Catalan and Spanish, being negative concord languages, can combine various negative items, of which at most one of them is a strong nega- tive item, therefore [+ QF], and at most one of them is not specified for QF (i.e. the negative marker no, on its default characterization). Double negation structures are those which combine various negative items of which at least two of them are strong, or at least two of them are not specified for QF. Finally, the prediction of the analysis put forward in Table 4 is that languages which allow the occurrence of n-words in polar and negative contexts, as well as in expletive and negative concord structures, are those that have n-words lexically defined with a specified negative property and a variable underspecified QF, subject to various licensing conditions on the LF building process. 5. Conclusions Summarizing, I conclude that: (i) Catalan and Spanish n-words are indefinite expressions which are incorporated into a numeral with a 11011 meaning. They are inherently negative expressions. ‚s Interestingly, these claims are in accordance with Martins™s (1999: 8) statement that ﬁdifferent lev- els of conservatism / innovation are displayed by the modem Romance languagesﬂ, and also with her conclusion that ﬁin the history of Romance, negative indefinites evolved from weak polarity items to strong polarity items, therefore ‚reducing™ their degree of underspecificationﬂ (1999: 21). 578 M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 (ii) Catalan and Spanish n-words license a non-negative / expletive reading, as well as a negative reading (in NC configurations), because they are weak quantifiers with an inherent variable underspecified [a] QF, which is transparent to the fea- ture values of the elements in the syntactic environment surrounding them. N- words are not semantically ambiguous lexical items, but semantically under- specified for the quantificational property they are intrinsically characterized by. (iii) Catalan and Spanish n-words are semantically dependent expressions, because within specific structural environments they are expressions which are licensed in the semantic scope of an expression z that introduces a semantic property h, which is not exclusively the negative property. (iv) Relative to the negation cycle, n-words show a different status in various lan- guages and in different dialects of the same language. Some crucial contrasts between Catalan and Spanish data show that n-words tend to lose the PI status and tend to acquire a strongly defined QF. That is, the value specification of the QF feature shows a tendency towards a reduction of the degree of underspeci- fication, and in this respect Spanish is more innovative than Catalan. (v) The hierarchy of negative items postulated in Table 4 allows us to make the following predictions: (1) only items not negatively specified for QF can occur preverbally, and (2) only items not positively specified for QF can occur in polar and expletive contexts, and are optimal candidates for an absorption oper- ation. (vi) This analysis of n-words conforms to Chomsky™s minimalist program, accord- ing to which variation among natural languages is reduced to morphological differences. In the case studied here the differences among various types of negative items are attributed to the various specifications [+, CL, -1 for the QF grammatical feature. References Acquaviva, P., 1993. The Logical Form of negation: A study of operator-variable structures in syntax. Ph.D. dissertation, Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa. Acquaviva, P., 1999. Negation and operator dependencies: Evidence from Italian. Lingua 108, 137-174. Barwise, J. and R. Cooper, 198 1, Generalized quantifiers and natural language. Linguistics and Philoso- phy 4, 159-219. Bosque, I., 1980. Sobre la negation. Madrid: Catedra. Bosque, I., 1994. La negacidn y el principio de las categorias vacfas. In: V. Demonte (ed.), Gramatica del espaiiol, Publicaciones de la Nueva Revista de Filologia HispAnica, 167-199. Mexico: El Cole- gio de Mexico. Bosque, I., 1996. La polaridad modal. Cuarto congreso de hispanistas de Asia. Setll: Asocacion Asiatica de Hispanistas. Danon, G., 1996. The syntax of determiners in Hebrew. MA thesis, Tel Aviv University. Dtprez, V., 1997. Two types of negative concord. Probus 9, 103-143. Diesing, M., 1992. Indefinites. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Doetjes, J., 1997. Quantifiers and selection. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Leiden. Espinal, M.T., 1991. Negation in Catalan: Some remarks with regard to no pas. Catalan Working Papers in Linguistics 1, 3363. M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 579 Espinal, M.T., 1992. Expletive negation and logical absorption. The Linguistic Review 9(4), 333-358. Espinal, M.T., 1997. Expletive negation, negative concord and feature checking. Paper presented at the Eleventh Symposium on Romance Linguistics, Going Romance. Groningen: Rijksuniversiteit Groningen. Espinal, M.T., 1999. Negacid expletiva, concordanca negativa i dependencies semantiques. Ms. Univer- sitat Autbnoma de Barcelona. Espinal, M.T., forthcoming. La negaci6. In: J. Sola, M.R. Lloret, J. Mascar and M. Perez-Saldanya (eds.), Gramatica de1 catala contemporani, chapter 24. Barcelona: Empdries. Giannakidou, A., 1997. The landscape of polarity items. Ph.D. dissertation, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen. Giannakidou, A. and J. Quer, 1997. Long-distance licensing of negative indefinites. In: D. Forget P. Hirschbtihler, F. Martineau and M.L. River0 (eds.), Negation and polarity. Syntax and semantics, 95-l 13. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Haegeman, L. and R. Zanuttini, 1991. Negative heads and the NEG criterion. The Linguistic Review 8, 233-251. Hoeksema, J., 1983. Negative polarity and the comparative. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 1, 403434. Horn, L.R., 1972. On the semantic properties of logical operators in English. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Linguistics Club, 1976. Hualde, J.I., 1992. Catalan. London: Routledge. Isac, D., 1999. Negative concord. GLOW Newsletter 42, 28-29. Jespersen, O., 1917. Negation in English and other languages. Kobenhavn: A.F. Host, 1966. Selected writings of Otto Jespersen. London: Allen de1 Orwin, 1961. Jespersen, O., 1924. The philosophy of grammar. The Norton Library, 1965. Ladusaw, W.A., 1992. Expressing negation. SRC-92-03, University of California Santa Cruz. C. Barker and D. Dowty (eds.), SALT II proceedings. Ohio: The Ohio State University. Ladusaw, W.A., 1993. Negation, indefinites, and the Jespersen cycle. LRC-93-02, University of Califor- nia Santa Cruz. Ladusaw, W.A., 1996. Negation and polarity items. In: S. Lappin (ed.), The handbook of contemporary semantic theory, 321-341. Oxford: Blackwell. Laka, I., 1990. Negation in syntax: On the nature of functional categories and projections. Ph.D. disser- tation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Laka, I., 1993. Negative fronting in Romance: Movement to Z. In: W.J. Ashby (ed.), Linguistics per- spectives on the Romance languages, 315-333. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Llorens, E., 1929. La negation en el espatiol antiguo con referencia a otros idiomas. Anejo de la Revista de Filologia Espaiiola, Madrid. Martin, R., 1984. Pour une approche semantico-logique du ne dit ‚expletif™. Revue de Linguistique Romane 48.99-121. Martins, A.M., 1998. On the need of underspecified features in syntax: Polarity as a case study. GLOW Newsletter 40, 4647. Martins, A.M. 1999. Polarity items in Romance: Underspecification and lexical change. To appear in: S. Pintzuk, G. Tsoulas and A. Warner (eds.), Diachronic syntax: Models and mechanisms, chapter 9. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Matos, G., 1999. Negative concord and the scope of negation. Paper presented at the IX Colloquium on Generative Grammar. Bellaterra: Universitat Autbnoma de Barcelona. May, R., 1989. Interpreting Logical Form. Linguistics and Philosophy 12, 387435. McNally, L., 1998. Existential sentences without existential quantification. Linguistics and Philosophy 21, 353-392. McNally, L. and V. van Geenhoven, 1998. Redefining the weak / strong distinction. Ms., Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona and Max Planck Institut fur Psycholinguistik, Nijmegen. M&ark, G., 1974. Existential sentences in English. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT. New York: Garland Press, 1979. Muller, C., 1991. La negation en francais: Syntaxe, semantique et elements de comparison avec les autres langues romanes. Gentve: Librairie Droz. 580 M.T. Espinal I Lingua 110 (2000) 557-580 Peres, J., 1997. Extending the notion of negative concord. In: D. Forget, P. Hirschbtihler, F. Martineau and M.L. River0 (eds.), Negation and polarity. Syntax and Semantics, 289-310. Amsterdam: Ben- jamins. Quer, J., 1993. The syntactic licensing of negative items. MA thesis, Universitat Autbnoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra. Quer, J., 1998. Distinguishing between negative and non-negative licensing of negative items. In: N. Catala and M. Bargallo (eds.), Proceedings of the IV Colloquium on Generative Grammar, 250-266. Tarragona: Universitat Rovira i Virgili. Reinhart, T., 1995. Interface strategies. Utrecht Institute of Linguistics - OTS Working Paper, Utrecht. Reinhart, T., 1997. Quantifier scope: How labor is divided between QR and choice functions. Linguis- tics and Philosophy 20, 335-397. Reinhart, T., 1998. Wh- in situ in the minimalist program. Natural Language Semantics 6, 29-56. Rigau, Cl., 1998. La variacid sintactica: Uniformitat en la diversitat. Caplletra 25, 63-82. Rooryck, J., 1994. On two types of underspecification: Towards a feature theory shared by syntax and phonology. Probus 6,207-233. Sanchez, C., 1999. La negacibn. In: I. Bosque and V. Demonte (eds.). Nueva gramatica descriptiva de la lengua espaiiola, chapter 40, 2561-2634. Madrid: Espasa-Calpe. Sola, J., 1973. La negacio. Estudis de sintaxi catalana 2, 87-l 18. Barcelona: Editions 62. Sufier, M., 1995. Negative elements, island effects and resumptive no. The Linguistic Review 12, 233-273. Szabolcsi, A., 1997. Strategies for scope taking. In: A. Szabolcsi (ed.), Ways of scope taking, 109-1.54. Amsterdam : Kluwer. Vallduvi, E., 1994. Polarity items, n-words and minimizers in Catalan and Spanish. Probus 6, 263-294. Vendryes, J. 1950. Sur la negation abusive. Bulletin de la Societe de Linguistique de Paris 46(l), l-18. Wagenaar, K. 1930. Etude sur la negation en ancien espagnol jusqu™au XV&me siecle. Groningen: Wal- ters. Watanabe, A., 1997. Absorption as feature checking. GLOW Newsletter 38, 54-55. Zanuttini, R., 1991. Syntactic properties of sentential negation: A comparative study of Romance lan- guages. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania. Philadelphia. 