L n ua ELSEVIER Lingua 112 (2002) 415-422 www.elsevier.com/locate/lingua Book review Olga Fischer, Ans van Kemenade, Willem Koopman and Wim van der Wurff, The syntax of early English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000. xviii + 341 pp. ISBN 0 521 55410 1 (hb), 0 521 55626 0 (pb). Reviewed by Marcel den Dikken, Columbia University New York (CUNY) Grad- uate Center, 33 West 42 Street, New York, NY 10036, USA. Acting on student demand, I found myself teaching a seminar on historical syntax in the 2001 spring semester. Not being a historical linguist myself, I was delighted to stumble upon The syntax of early English, 'a guide to the development of English syntax between the Old and Modem periods', as the blurb text puts it. After going through the book, I was even more delighted: the book would serve perfectly as reading material for my class, and it gave me an excellent head-start in preparing for it, especially because of the breadth of the discussion and the variety of topics touched upon. That breadth and variety is the welcome result of the fact that each of the mem- bers of the quadrumvirate of Dutch specialists on the history of English syntax has worked on sets of topics that nicely complement each other and, when brought together under the umbrella of a single volume and expanded by general outlines of Old and Middle English syntax, ensure outstanding coverage of facts and research in English diachronic syntax. Thus, thanks to Olga Fischer's extensive work on infini- tival constructions, the book contains an entire chapter devoted to historical changes in these constructions (esp. the to-infinitive) plus a discussion of the development of have+to-infinitive into a periphrastic modal in the chapter on grammaticalisation. To that chapter, Ans van Kemenade contributed a careful discussion (replete with rare examples she discovered in her own work) of Jespersen's cycle in the development of English sentential negation, and her seminal dissertation on case and word-order change forms the backbone of the chapters on (the loss of) Verb Second and the change from OV to VO order, the latter also relying heavily on Wire van der Wurff's recent work on OV and VO in Middle English. Van der Wurff's earlier research on the 'easy-to-please' construction and its diachronic development is fleshed out in one full chapter of the book, and so is Willem Koopman's work on verb-particle constructions in Old and Middle English. Of course, the book is not just a compendium of the work of the four contribu- ting authors. The book is much more than that. In chapter 1, the authors provide a 0378-2166/02/$ - see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: S0024-3841(01)00046 8 416 Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 415422 concise background discussion of general issues in language change and grammar change, carefully teasing the two apart and considering the types of theoretical approaches represented in the extant literature. The discussion there and elsewhere in the book takes the generative perspective on diachronic change (i.e., diachronic change as a series of synchronic changes) as its reference point, starting out from Lightfoot™s (1979) groundbreaking work. Along the way, that discussion touches upon questions relating to input matching (does all of the input have to get matched by the learner™s grammar? - presenting suggestive evidence from Henry™s (1997) work, the authors suggest that it does not), and Kroch™s (1989) Double Base Hypoth- esis about synchronic variation as the competition of different grammars. Chapter 1 also contains a substantial section on data questions and methodology, which will be useful to anyone who, after going through this book, finds him/herself enthralled by historical linguistics and wants to embark on research in this domain. For obvious reasons, the broader issues concerning the optimal theoretical model for the analysis of historical change which are touched upon in chapter 1 (should we take the language learner to be the key? is grammar competition a workable approach to variation and change? what about input matching? when and how are parameters reset? etc.) play no role in the next two chapters, which are brief descrip- tive outlines of the major syntactic and morphological properties of Old and Middle English. These two chapters lay out the essentials of what is known about the avail- able data, preluding at various points on the discussions to follow in the later, more analytically oriented chapters. Since the coverage of those later chapters is so impressive, there is a lot in the descriptive chapters on Old and Middle English which does indeed get revisited later, leading to some repetitiveness. However, these two chapters also touch upon material which one rarely sees discussed in theoretical works - such as the fact that, in Middle English, certain quantifiers start appearing to the left of the indefinite article in contexts in which they could not do so in Old English and, in some cases, cannot do so anymore in Modem English either (like vch a toune ‚each a town™). It is good that the authors included these little tidbits - maybe they will inspire someone. While it is obvious that chapters 2 and 3 are silent on broad theoretical questions like the ones raised in chapter 1, it is somewhat unfortunate that these issues are not at the forefront of the discussions in chapters 4-9 either. The discussions of Verb Second and its loss and the word order in the verb phrase do address in quite some detail the Double Base approach developed by Pintzuk (1991), and in fact develop new accounts of their own, and in the discussion of infinitival constructions the notion of analogy (or analogical extension) is occasionally invoked (without it being included in the index, by the way), but on the whole the case-study chapters remain fairly non-committal when it comes to the broader questions raised at the outset. Of course they serve as a fine starting-point for discussions in class, which makes this book a very useful ingredient to any course in historical linguistics; but the fact that the text discussion often shies away from taking a stand may be somewhat disap- pointing to those readers who expected answers. Sometimes, in fact, the reader does not even get all the questions. The discussion of the history of the ‚easy-to-please™ construction in Old and Middle English in Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 415-422 417 chapter 8 (where the term ‚easy-to-please™ construction is used as a descriptive cover, not as a technical term h Za tough-movement) may serve as a case in point. There we find out that in Old English this construction was essentially a modal passive (of the type found in Dutch and German as well; cf. Dutch dat is (nietlmoeilijk) te begrijpen ‚that is not/hard to understand™, as distinct from the tough-movement construction dat is moeilijk om te begrijpen, where the complementiser om is oblig- atory and the tough-adjective no longer alternates with niet ‚not™ or zero) - put in more theoretical terms, its derivation involved NP-movement. Consequently, P- stranding is not attested in the Old English construction.™ It is only around 1400 that P-stranding in this construction comes in - which is roughly at the same time at which P-stranding in unambiguous modal passives emerges as well (and, interest- ingly, quite a bit later than the point at which pseudopassives first appear, in the 13th century). Many examples of P-stranding in Middle English ‚easy-to-please™ con- structions could still be accommodated by an NP-movement analysis. But not all: the distribution of P-stranding in these constructions extends to contexts in which pseudopassivisation is not an option (e.g., the gospel is easiest to gain heaven by). So at some point in the Middle English period, an AN-movement derivation for the ‚easy-to-please™ construction of the type at work in present-day English this book is easy (‚or you) to read comes in, and it eventually replaces the earlier NP-movement derivation. Chapter 8 presents a reasonable perspective on why it is that the NP- movement derivation is lost: in modal passives like (Old/early Middle English) this is not to understand, the seemingly active infinitive is syntactically passive, which is possible in Old and early Middle English thanks to the presence of infinitival mor- phology which can absorb the external 2-role; in the course of the Middle English period, however, infinitival morphology is lost, and concomitantly the modal passive vanishes as well. That side of the coin seems taken care of, therefore; but one is left to wonder why the AN-movement derivation was apparently an innovation in Mid- dle English: why wasn™t this derivation possible all along, throughout the history of English? The discussion in chapter 8 pays no attention to this burning question; it does not even raise it. Nor does chapter 7, on the development of infinitival clauses (esp. to- infinitives) in chapter 7. There we do learn, in passing, that the infinitival relative construction is apparently a ‚new construction™ in Middle English (pp. 212-213; but see Los (2000: 271) for two examples which she claims are Old English infinitival relatives), but no link with chapter 8 is hinted at. If correct, the absence of both infinitival relatives and ‚genuine™ tough-movement constructions (of Chomsky™s AN-type) suggests that Old English had no null operator movement in to-infinitives, ™ I note in passing, however, that chapter 8 seems to overstate the case here: the arithmetic it presents, whereby about five tokens of ‚easy-to-please™ constructions with P-stranding could have been expected in the corpus, is based on a sum total of 46 alleged cases of ‚easy-to-please™ constructions with a non- subject gap in Old English; but as some of the illustrations presented on pp. 262-263 show, quite a few of those 46 cases may not involve a non-subject gap at all, instead being examples of it is easy to VP with a null expletive matrix subject. This may severely undercut the key claim and the discussion based on it. 418 Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 415-422 which may then be taken to shed light on the structure of the to-infinitive of Old English. But the book does not put two and two together - largely due to the com- partmentalisation of the discussion into chapters whose topics often involve quite a bit of overlap. This particular compartmentalisation (resulting, it seems, from the fact that the book draws on existing work by the individual authors) leads to fragmentation of the discussion elsewhere as well. Thus, to stay close to the preceding discussion, the chapters on infinitival constructions and ‚easy-to-please™ constructions both address the rise of the passive infinitive (as in this is EO be done, replacing the earlier ‚modal passive™ this is CO do), but essentially in their own separate ways - though they both end up blaming the loss of syntactically passive but morphologically active to do on the loss of infinitival morphology, chapter 7 (p. 235) relates this to work by Vanden Wyngaerd (1990) and Petter (1998) but chapter 8 brings it up much more tentatively and attributes it to a suggestion by Anthony Warner (p.c.). This is one context in which somewhat tighter editing of the text could have produced a stronger discus- sion - one which could have presented an integrated perspective on the rise of the passive infinitive. Another example of compartmentalisation leading to undesirable fragmentation is the fact that the discussion of the verb-particle construction is awarded a chapter of its own, as a result of which there is substantial overlap between the discussion in chapters 4 and 5 (on Verb Second and the change from OV to VO, respectively) and chapter 6 (on particles, perhaps the single most reliable diagnostic for word order and sentence structure in the history of English, in partic- ular because of their relative immobility). Awkward also is the fact that while the second half of chapter 5 is devoted to developing a VO-based, antisymmetric analy- sis of medieval English sentence structure, with massive leftward movement to specifier positions of AgrPs and PredPs (h la Zwart (1997) for Dutch), chapter 6 is largely neutral when it comes to questions of underlying structure, concentrating some very brief (and essentially uninstructive) remarks with reference to the Uni- versal Base hypothesis in two separate subsections, one in the middle of the chapter (on Old English) and one at the end (on Middle English). Organisationally, therefore, the book could have been better; perhaps the authors will be able to set some of these things straight in a later edition of the book. As far as its content is concerned, however, the book is very satisfying. Though the whole book is worth careful attention, I found the following passages of particular interest. In chapter 4 the authors outline a fresh perspective on the syntax of Verb Second in medieval English, improving on Van Kemenade (1987) and Pintzuk (1991) in important respects. Following Van Kemenade, chapter 4 argues that all constituents fronted to sentence-initial position in a root clause end up in SpecCP - not just wh- constituents and other operators, but topics as well. But following Pintzuk, the dis- cussion shows that the finite verb, while in C when SpecCP is filled by an operator (wh, _a ‚then™, ne ‚not™), is in a lower position when the sentence-initial constituent is a topic. In other words, the finite verb raises to C only in operator-initial root clauses, not otherwise; this is what the proposal in chapter 4 shares with Pintzuk™s analysis, but it differs in that, unlike Pintzuk, it places all sentence-initial con- stituents in the same slot, SpecCP. This account makes sense of the crucial fact Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 415422 419 (which seems to be pretty much unique to Old English) that, while full nominal sub- jects systematically follow the finite verb no matter ‚who™s on first™, we find a dif- ference between topic-initial and operator-initial root clauses when it comes to the placement of pronominal subjects vis-d-vis the finite verb in Old English: the finite verb precedes the pronominal subject in operator-initial clauses but it follows the pronoun in topic-initial ones. The analysis developed in chapter 4 analyses these facts as in (1): (1) a. CCP OP [c# Vfin [rP SUpron b. LIP 01™ k Win [FP c. [cp TOP [c, 0 fFP SW-on d. [cp TOP k 0 [FP IF™ F LP ‚.. -.11111 LIP SUnom -11111 [:: ﬁvfi, [,r . . . -11111 [Fr Vfin [,r SUnom . ..11111 This analysis, coupled with the assumption that NegP is located between FP and IP/TP, also captures straightforwardly the fact that in Old English negative concord constructions with ne . . . na (constructions which were put on the map by Van Keme- nade, and figure prominently in both chapter 4 and chapter 9), the negator na always follows the finite verb while its placement vis-ci-vis the subject depends on whether it is a pronoun or a full nominal: we find ne Vfin SUpron na . ..and ne Vfin na SUnom . ..) a pattern which follows directly if ne is an operator in SpecCP, Vfin is in C, the subject pronoun is in SpecFP, na is in SpecNegP below FP, and the full-nominal subject is in SpecIP. The structure in (1) performs well, therefore, when it comes to accounting for the word order facts presented by Old English Verb Second root clauses; and unlike Pintzuk™s approach (which places topics in SpecIP, d la Diesing (1990) for Yiddish and Rognvaldsson and Thrainsson (1990) for Icelandic), it also correctly ensures that embedded V2 with a non-subject in initial position is essen- tially unattested. An interesting conclusion (shared with Pintzuk) that presents itself in the light of chapter 4™s discussion of Verb Second in Old English is that essentially nothing happened throughout the history of English with respect to the fronting of the finite verb to C: Vfin always raises to C whenever there is an operator in SpecCP. Of course the set of operators has shrunk somewhat, from {wh, Neg, _u} to just { wh, Neg}, but otherwise everything stays the same in the CP domain. One notch down, at FP, fronting of the finite verb is lost in the course of time, however. This has often been tied to the (almost complete) loss of finite verb inflection - some- thing which chapter 4 can make sense of by taking ‚FP™ to be the projection that ﬁrepresents the morphology for subject-verb agreementﬂ (p. 135; though a non- trivial caveat is in order here: earlier in the discussion (p. 119) the authors had pointed out that ﬁthe positions occupied by pronominal subjects are available to object pronouns as wellﬂ, so SpecFP cannot be specific to subject pronouns). With the loss of subject agreement, then, either FP was lost completely or (as the authors suggest) verb-fronting to F disappeared. Choosing between these two options is not an easy matter, but it seems to me one might want to preserve FP and the placement differential between pronominal and full-nominal subjects for present-day English in the light of the fact that weak pronominal and full-nominal subjects do still 420 Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 415-422 behave distinctly (see e.g. Kimball and Aissen™s (1971) discussion of Massachusetts English the people who Clarkl*he think are in the garden, as discussed in Kayne (1989) and Den Dikken (2001); the latter paper also discusses a variety of other con- texts in which, in present-day English, pronominal and full-nominal subjects exhibit distinct behaviour). All in all, then, chapter 4™s discussion of Verb Second in the his- tory of English is rich in empirical coverage and has some interesting potential beyond the domain of facts it was made to account for. Interesting also is the discussion in chapter 7 of the rise of to-infinitives and ECM constructions in Middle English. In general, to-infinitives in Old English are vastly less common than bare infinitives; it is in the course of the Middle English period that the to-infinitive gains a lot of ground (at the expense of subjunctival that- clauses, not bare infinitives, as is often claimed; see Los (2000) for detailed discus- sion), and in this period we also witness the emergence of to-infinitival ECM con- structions. ECM (or AcI, as Fischer et al. call it, following traditional grammatical terminology) was never non-existent in English - perception and causative verbs always selected ECM complements. But those involved bare infinitives, as they still to (Z sawlhadlmadellet him leave): with to-infinitival complements we do not find ECM in Old English at all. In present-day English, to-infinitival ECM is common under believe-type verbs, but in Middle English the distribution of this particular construction still seemed limited to more or less direct translations from Latin. Much more important in the development of to-infinitival ECM turn out to have been the changes taking place in object control constructions with verbs like command. In Old English, those took a dative-marked object and an infinitival clause (usually a to-infinitive, even in Old English; see Los (2000: Ch. 7); but in Middle English, the morphological case system eroded and the verb™s object became indistinguishable from an accusative. Two other developments - that of the passive infinitive, which I already alluded to earlier in this review, and the rigidification of word order to strict VO - conspired with the loss of morphological case to produce constructions like he commanded the crown to be set on the altar, an unmistakable to-infinitival ECM construction. Parallel developments took place in adjectival constructions like Old English it is bad lyou-DAT] [PRO to smoke], where, likewise, case-loss (this time going hand in hand with the emergence of the preposition for) and rigidification of head-complement word order eventually produced Modem English it is bad [for you to smoke], once again with to-infinitival ECM. With the to-infinitival ECM pattern firmly in place for these two constructions, the stage had been set for a spread of the phenomenon to other verb classes - believe type verbs in particular. It is noteworthy that chapter 7 discusses the development of for-to ECM infini- tives purely with reference to loss of morphological case, the OV-to-V0 word order change and the facilitating effect of the passive infinitive. In particular, no appeal is made at all to the status of the infinitival marker to. In this respect, the account of the emergence of for-to ECM is entirely different from the one presented in Roberts™ (1993) work, where the loss of inflectional morphology on the verb (more techni- cally put, the loss of I-‚) in the Middle English period makes it possible to base-fill Infl with lexical material - i.c., the infinitival marker to. For Roberts, once to can be base-generated in Infl, ECM in to-infinitives becomes possible. And since for him, Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 415422 421 the loss of 1-l allows other elements (in particular, the dummy do) to base-fill Infl as well, Roberts thereby establishes a connection between the development of to-infini- tival ECM constructions and do-support. That link seems impossible to capture on the approach laid out in chapter 7 of the present book. That may be unfortunate; but on the other hand, the traditional consensus that the status of pre-infinitival to changed from a P-element (taking a case-inflected nominal infinitival complement) in Old English to an inflectional element in Middle English seems dubious when submitted to careful scrutiny (as has been done in Los (2000), to which I refer the interested reader for detailed discussion). The approach taken in chapter 7 may therefore be an empirically more adequate account of the historical facts than the one represented by Roberts (1993). I do not have the space in this brief review to highlight any other parts of the book. Suffice it, therefore, to just emphasise these two and to present them as exem- plary for the discussion throughout the book - a book broad in coverage yet at the same time rich in detail, a remarkable combination given the mere 341 pages (including an extensive bibliography and an index) that it takes up. Aside from the fact (pointed out above) that some of the discussions scattered across the individual chapters might have been better off in one unified discussion, and from a few tiny glitches (like the use of ‚factive™ instead of ‚factitive™ in two places on p. 298, and the terminological confusion about the Old English negative particle ne on pp. 307 and 313, where it is first called a prefix, then a proclitic, and finally a ‚prefix/pro- clitic™), the book is also very well written and edited. I warmly recommend it, there- fore, to anyone who is interested in the syntax of early English. References Diesing, Molly, 1990. Verb movement and the subject position in Yiddish. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 8, 41-79. Dikken, Marcel den, 2001. ‚Pluringulars™, pronouns and quirky agreement. The Linguistic Review 18, 19-41. Henry, Alison, 1997. Viewing change in progress: The loss of Verb-Second in Hibemo-English im- peratives. In: Ans van Kemenade and Nigel Vincent (eds.), Parameters of morphosyntactic change, 272-296. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Kayne, Richard, 1989. Notes on English agreement. CIEFL Bulletin 1, 4147. Kemenade, Ans van, 1987. Syntactic case and morphological case in the history of English. Dordrecht: Foris. Kimball, John and Judith Aissen, 1971. I think, you think, he think. Linguistic Inquiry 2, 241-246. Kroch, Anthony, 1989. Reflexes of grammar in patterns of language change. Language Variation and Change 1, 199-244. Lightfoot, David, 1979. Principles of diachronic syntax. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Los, Bettelou, 2000. Infinitival complementation in Old and Middle English. Dissertation, Vrije Univer- siteit Amstedam/HIL. LOT Dissertations 3 1. Petter, Marga, 1998. Getting PRO under control. Dissertation, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam/HIL. LOT Dissertations 8. Pintzuk, Susan, 1991. Phrase structures in competition: Variation and change in Old English word order. Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania. Roberts, Ian, 1993. Verbs and diachronic syntax. A comparative history of English and French. Dor- drecht: Kluwer. 422 Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 41.5422 Rognvaldsson, Eiriiur and Hiiskuldur Thrainsson, 1990. On Icelandic word order once more. In: Joan Maling and Annie Zaenen (eds.), Modem Icelandic syntax, 340. New York: Academic Press. Wyngaerd, Guido Vanden, 1990. PRO-legomena. An investigation into the distribution and the referen- tial properties of the empty category PRO. Dissertation, Universitaire Instelling Antwerp. Zwart, Jan-Wouter, 1997. Morphosyntax of verb movement. A minimalist approach to the syntax of Dutch. Dordrecht: Kluwer. 