ELSEVIBR Lingua 111 (2001) 697-706 www.elsevier.coml/locate/lingua Book review Horrocks, Geoffrey (1997) Greek: A history of the language and its speakers. Longman Linguistics Library. London and New York: Longman, 393 pgs. Reviewed by Linda Manney, University of La Verne, Athens Campus, Athens, Greece. 1. Introduction The book Greek: A history of the language and its speakers by Geoffrey Hor- rocks spans roughly four thousand years of linguistic evolution, from Mycenaean Greek of the 2nd millenium B.C. to Modem Demotic Greek of the 21st century A.D. The author provides abundant linguistic evidence as well as sociohistorical detail in support of a central theme of the book that the Greek language has evolved across the ages as part of a complex ecosystem, affected by language internal pressures while adapting to language external circumstances. The book is organized around the major periods of Greek history and for each historical era discussed, key linguistic developments are documented. In addition to the richness of linguistic detail provided, the book offers insightful information on the sociohistorical setting within which major linguistic innovations took place. Horrocks provides a bright sketch of major Greek achievements in art, science, and colonial expansion, as well as an unflinching view of the darker periods of Greek history, which included betrayal, conquest and defeat, foreign occupation, and a resulting decline in artistic achievement and material wealth. In short, the book presents a vibrant and engaging account of the ongoing development of Greek in its historical, cultural, and geographic context: we see the Greek lan- guage as a dynamic and expressive linguistic system, a reflection of the vicissi- tudes of three and a half thousand years as experienced by the people who lived their daily lives through the medium of Greek, and the synergetic interaction between the language and its speakers in particular temporal, psychosocial, and spatial settings. Because Horrocks™ book is tightly organized and utilizes a refined and trans- parent prose style, the breadth of material presented is both accessible and appeal- ing to a wide audience of readers, including students of general linguistics, his- torical linguistics, sociolinguistics, cultural anthropology, and Classical, Byzantine, and Modem Greek studies. Therefore, while the book is pitched at an 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter 0 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 698 Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 697-706 advanced undergraduate level, it would enrich any scholarly collection in linguis- tics and/or Greek studies. Having thus presented my overall response to Horrocks™ book, I am now ready to discuss its contents in more detail. In the discussion below, I provide summaries for each of the seventeen chapters of the book, further organized into three subsections according to the historical period depicted. Next, I assess the merits of the book, and end the exposition with a few concluding observations. 2. Section I: Ancient Greek: From Mycenae to the Roman Empire 2.1. Chapter I : Ancient Greek and its Dialects This chapter provides a brief sketch and chronology of the major Ancient Greek dialects. The earliest known dialect of Greek is Mycenaean Greek, which dates from the second half of the second millenium B.C. (c. 1600 B.C.) and was written in a syl- labary known as Linear B. Linear B, in turn, is viewed by some experts as a deriva- tive of the earlier Linear A, a syllabary used by the Minoan civilization which occu- pied much of what comprises the contemporary Greek island of Crete. In the late 9th or early 8th century B.C., a Semitic-based alphabetic system replaced the earlier Greek syllabary and formed the basis for the now familiar Greek alphabet. The major dialects of Ancient Greek, which developed most fully after the demise of the Mycenaean civilization, are broadly divided into East Greek, which includes Attic - Ionic and Arcado - Cypriot, and West Greek, which includes Peloponnesian Doric and North West Greek. According to one view, these dialect groups represent socially defined collectivities of people, each of which subscribed to a belief in its common ancestral source and corresponding ancestral territory (Hall, 1997). How- ever, dialect boundaries are not as tidy as the folk models would suggest: an abun- dant body of evidence confiis the existence of mixed dialects, partial divergences, and contact phenomena, thus suggesting that the actual synchronic picture involved considerable linguistic complexity. 2.2. Chapter 2: Classical Greek: Ojfi™cial and literary ‚standards™ This chapter documents the development of genre-based dialects in Classical Greek (i.e., 5th century B.C.), yet even as literary genres each came to be associated with a particular dialectal variant, dialect mixing, even within a particular text, was commonplace. The earliest surviving Homeric texts were linguistically heteroge- neous, especially since the oral tradition had further allowed for the routine updating of epic grammar and lexical items to reflect contemporary trends. It was not until after the alphabetic system gained precedence in the 8th and 7th centuries B.C. that efforts were made to present a single ‚correct™ version of a literary text. Later, dur- ing the Classical period, two key genre-conditioned dialects gained precedence. The Ionian dialect was preeminent in the fields of science, philosophy and histori- ography, to the extext that historians and scientists from areas outside Ionia used the Book review I Lingua I I1 (2001) 697-706 699 Ionian prose standard in their writing. In the area of tragic drama, Attic prevailed, and an ‚Ionicized-Attic™ would later evolve as the literary language for the entire Greek-speaking world. 2.3. Chapter 3: The rise of Attic This transitional chapter briefly describes the role of Attic during the Classical period. Classical art forms such as dramatic tragedy and comedy, philosophy, and rhetoric were developed in Attic, and as it gained status as the medium for artistic expression in the ancient Greek world, Attic was also adopted for public administra- tion. After a series of contact phenomena through which ancient Attic incorporated a number of Ionic elements, a modern Ionicized Attic supplanted the more conserv- ative Attic, the latter of which formed the basis for the Attic based Koine of the Hel- lenistic era. 2.4. Chapter 4: Greek in the Hellenistic world The chapter documents the development of Koine Greek, advanced during the Hellenistic period (i.e., 323 B.C.-31 B.C.), as Greek military powers, led by Mace- donian generals, undertook a series of successful military campaigns as far east as Egypt, Syria, and Persia. Koine Greek, functioning as the administrative language in the newly Hellenized territories, displayed considerable regional diversity. While technical prose and history were often written in the standard Koine, many Greek- speaking poets and rhetoricians continued to compose in their native dialects. In non-native Greek speaking areas, such as Egypt and Persia, bilingualism was the norm among the educated elite. From a diachronic perspective, Koine Greek pro- vides several important links between archaic and more modern forms of Greek. Key linguistic innovations which first appeared in the Greek of the Hellenistic period have been stabilized in the Standard Modem Greek of today; for example, comple- ment structures which replace the infinitive construction with a fmite verb; the artic- ular infiitive construction, functioning as a genmd, which appears to have replaced the participial construction; and the increased frequency of {verb-subject} over {verb-final} word order. 2.5. Chapter 5: Greek in the Roman Empire The chapter surveys major changes in the Greek language and culture during the Imperial Roman Period (approximately 1st century B.C. to 4th century A.D.). Because of the prestige associated with the Classical tradition, Greek enjoyed a rel- atively high status during the Roman period. As a result, the native Greek commu- nity increasingly looked to the past for self-identity. Popular opinion supported the revival and usage of archaic linguistic forms, thus encouraging a split between the ancient Attic ideal on the one hand and the actual heterogeneity of spoken Koine Greek on the other. The foundations for diglossia, which would continue well into the 20th century A.D., were now well established. At the same time, however, as 700 Book review 1 Lingua 1 I I (2001) 697-706 Christianity was embraced by the educated classes, a more stylized Koine appeared which borrowed elements of the pre-Christian historical and philosophical traditions. Morphosyntactically, Koine Greek displayed the following innovations during the Roman Period: the extension of the word .-06- ‚same, self™ to a demonstrative usage and then to an anaphoric pronoun; the loss of distinctive middle morphology so that middle and passive inflections were now isomorphic; replacement of the morphological future tense with a periphrastic future; the formal merging of the per- fect and the aorist. Although some of the linguistic innovations which appeared in the Greek Koine also appeared in the contemporary Latin of the times, the Greek language nevertheless continued to evolve on its own terms. In fact, in view of the entire range of documented Indo-European languages, current scholarship shows that the Greek language displays the closest affinities with the Indo-Iranian and Sanskrit subgroups rather than with the Western group, the latter of which Latin is a member (Palmer, 1980). 2.6. Chapter 6: Spoken KoinC in Roman Empire This chapter provides a lively documentation of the colloquial spoken Greek of the time. By examining extracts from a number of private papyri documents of the common citizenry, dating from 2nd to 4th centuries A.D., Horrocks illustrates key phonological and morphosyntactic changes and also provides a window into the pre- vailing ethos of the times. Textual evidence confiis that the Greek phonological system underwent a major change during the Roman period, as the loss of the phone- mic distinction between long and short vowels led to the evolution of a simple six- vowel system and to the subsequent shift from a pitch accent to a stress accent sys- tem. In the consonantal inventory, textual extracts document the overall simplification of double consonants, the shift of voiced plosives /b, d, g/ to voiced fricatives /B, 6, y/, and the weakening of word-final [n] and [s]. Finally, key mor- phosyntactic developments include a continued reduction of the participial system, a continued disappearance of the dative case, as it is replaced by either the accusative or the genitive, and the continued loss of the ancient active verb paradigm [pt], as it is assimilated to more nearly regular active paradigms. 3. Section II: Byzantium: From Constantine I to Mehmet the Conqueror 3.1. Chapter 7: Historical Prelude This chapter provides an overview of the socio-political, military and cultural institutions which shaped the Byzantine Empire. Whereas the early Byzantine period witnessed efforts to define the overlapping roles of the Eastern Christian church and the Byzantine political and military establishment, the middle Byzantine period saw a number of destructive and dangerous extremes committed by political and ecclesi- astical zealots within and outside of the empire. In the political arena, central control of the empire had diminished, thereby undermining the military capacity to mobilize Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 697-706 701 a successful defense. Foreign invaders could not be deterred and soon overran large areas of the mainland and Asia Minor. Consequently, during the late Byzantine period general instability and foreign domination reigned. In the midst of widespread disorder, however, the Komnenos dynasty succeeded in temporarily restoring impe- rial authority and also led the empire through a widespread cultural revival. Unfor- tunately, the newly restored order was soon upset by the appearance of the western Christian Crusaders, whose campaign trail of destruction and death reached the east- em Christian capital of Constantinople. The integrity of the empire was seriously undermined when Christian Crusaders looted and razed Constantinople in 1204; the final blow was delivered in 1453 when the Byzantine capital was captured once again by an invading army, this time led by the Turkish Sultan Mehmet II. 3.2. Chapter 8: Greek in the Byzantine empire: The major issues The chapter characterizes the literary canon and surveys the major developments in the Greek language during the Byzantine era. By the end of the middle Byzantine period the Greek-speaking community had begun to experience a decline in morale after the empire sustained major losses in Asia Minor and Italy. This led to a renewed search for Greek identity, which in turn catalyzed an Atticist revival at the end of the 1 lth century and the elevation of epic-romantic poetry as .a ‚vernacular™ literature. Also characteristic of the era are numerous types of popular Christian texts, including the exegetical literature (expository texts which interpret church doc- trine), hagiographies (biographies of the saints), and chronicles (reference works which depict important events in the history of Christianity). While the Koine of the period encompassed a variety of registers, two of these gained greater salience, one which made use of a highly elaborated academic prose, the other which utliized more straightforward language for the didactic purposes of the church. other key lin- guistic developments of the period include a widespread convergence of linguistic features among the arealIy related languages of the Balkans (the so-called Sprach- bund phenomena), one key development which is the loss of the infinitive construc- tion in geographically contiguous languages such as Greek, Albanian, Romanian, and South Slavic (Joseph, 1983). 3.3. Chapter 9: Byzantine belles lettres In this chapter Horrocks provides a sampling of high register Byzantine prose, especially the historical narratives, illustrating and analyzing characteristic texts from the early, middle, and late Byzantine periods. While the individual texts selected display considerable stylistic variation, the authors, each employing a vari- ant of traditional Atticized Koine or a more purely Attic style, follow the contempo- rary norms for formal writing. In particular, erudite texts incorporate a number of archaic forms, both lexical and morphosyntactic, which had long fallen into disuse in the spoken vernacular. Indeed, educated Greek writers of the Byzantine period con- sistently deferred to the literary tradition of the classical past, thereby distinguishing themselves clearly from their non-Greek speaking contemporaries. 702 Book review I Lingua 1 I1 (2001) 697-706 3.4. Chapter 10: Middle styles in Byzantium The chapter focuses on key genres written in the more acccessible middle regis- ters of Byzantine Greek. Representative texts are exemplified and illustrated, and for each text provided, key linguistic features are identified. The major forms of Christ- ian literature such as the chronicles, hagiographies, and exegetical works are included, as are the paraenetic texts, which provided formal advice and counsel on matters of practical importance and thus typically display a more straightforward use of language. Through careful analysis of particular linguistic features of each text, Horrocks demonstrates that middle registers of the time typically employed a more modernizing syntactic structure with an overlay of occasional archaic elements that varied according to the author™s purpose. In Horrock™s account, it was this funda- mentally unitary middle style that would eventually evolve into the standard written language used by the Greek intelligensia of the 17th and 18th centuries (p. 204). 3.5. Chapter II: Spoken Greek in the Byzantine period: the principal developments The chapter documents in great detail the numerous changes which occurred in the phonological and morphosyntactic systems of the Greek vernacular during the Byzantine period, despite the hampering effect of the learned tradition on the natural evolution of the spoken language. One major sociolinguistic development during this period is the appearance of distinct regional dialects on the mainland; the Northern but not Southern variant displayed high vowel deletion and mid-vowel raising. While many later phonological developments were inconsistent and uneven, due to the powerful inhibiting influence of the written tradition, changes in the morphosyn- tax evolved more smoothly. In the nominal system, texts reveal a more restricted usage of the dative case, and paradigm standardization in both feminine and mascu- line declensions. In the verbal system, the following developments have been observed: a more restricted use of the infinitive construction, the disappearance of almost all participial forms, the evolution of a future particle [&z], the standardiza- tion of the aorist passive conjugation, and the loss of athematic inflections of ancient active voice verbs ending in [ut]. 3.6. Chapter 12: Texts in the ‚vernacular™ In this chapter, Horrocks carefully analyzes a number of Byzantine vernacular texts. Noting the recurrent linguistic patterns, both phonological and syntactic, in a variety of popular texts, Horrocks uncovers key elements of colloquial spoken Byzantine Greek, especially as it contrasted with official varieties of the standard- ized Koine. From the early and middle Byzantine periods, texts which exemplify popular culture are included, such as inscriptions, which recounted important histor- ical events from the point of view of Slavic and/or Bulgarian conquerors, and accla- mations, fifteen-syllable baudy chants often directed at unpopular emperors by irate crowds. According to Horrocks, these two text types clearly display the syntactic foundations for what would later evolve into Standard Modem Greek. From the late Book review I Lingua 1 I1 (2001) 697-706 703 Byantine period, numerous extracts are provided from epic poetry, i.e., Digen& Akritas, satirical verse, i.e., Poems of poor Prbdromos (Ptokhoprodromika), and the romances, i.e., Kalltmakhos and Khryssorrbe. Also included in the vernacular litera- ture are Greek translations of romances which originated in Western Europe. Finally, examples of the earliest dialect literature from Cyprus and Crete are illustrated, and elements of the local folk tradition as well as a number of regional linguistic inno- vations are identified in these texts. 4. Section III: Modern Greek: From the Ottoman Empire to the European Union 4.1. Chapter 13: Ottoman rule and the war of independence (1453-1832) This brief introductory chapter surveys the sociohistorical context of Ottoman rule, and considers the national liberation movement launched in mainland Greece and Asia Minor as the inevitable response to Ottoman control. Under Ottoman rule, subject peoples were organized into local collectivities on the basis of religion rather than language. This system, which granted considerable power to the Greek Ortho- dox Patriarch of Constantinople, had both merits and drawbacks. On the one hand, the church promoted Greek culture by maintaining traditional forms of the Greek language during an otherwise bleak era. On the other hand, the conservative linguis- tic policies enforced by the church effectively suppressed the development of most local varieties of spoken Greek, and by suppressing the dissemination of information imported from western Europe, the church hierarchy perpetuated outdated parochial values. Members of the Greek diaspora introduced a more modem perspective but were challenged by the elite living within the Ottoman Empire. The tide turned in favor of modernity, however, and the national liberation movement followed. Sover- eignity was achieved in 1832, and Prince Frederick Otto of Bavaria became the fust king of the modem Greek nation. 4.2. Chapter 14: Spoken Greek in the Ottoman Empire The chapter constitutes a sociolinguistic overview of spoken Greek during the Ottoman Empire. As such, it provides a classification and description of the major regional dialects which emerged during the period, and a discussion of key compo- nents of the well established Greek folk tradition. Although most areas under Ottoman control adopted, with predictable phonological adjustments, a number of Turkish lexical items, those areas which had enjoyed less contact with the Byzantine mainstream soon developed popular regional dialects, some of which would survive the assimilating forces of the Turkish mainstream, others of which would suffer a decline during Ottoman rule. The main dialectal variants of the period are Pontic Greek and Cappadocian, both from Asia Minor, the South Italian dialects, and the South and Southeastern dialects in Crete and Cyprus. As these dialects separated from the central core, they often preserved archaic features yet also displayed a 704 Book review I Lingua Ill (2001) 697-706 number of independent innovations. Greek folk literature and music, often ignored or misrepresented by intellectuals of the 18th and 19th centuries, also provide a rich source of information on the spoken varieties of the times. Indeed, it is claimed that the spoken Greek of the Ottoman period displays all the major components for the demoticized basis of Standard Modem Greek which would emerge in the 20th century. 4.3. Chapter 15: Written Greek in the Turkish period The chapter examines a number of Greek texts from the ottoman period and demonstrates the variety of registers in use at the time. For most texts presented, the syntactic patterns look very much like those of Standard Modem Greek, whereas the orthography and the morphology retain traditional archaizing forms. Modernized standard varieties of both written and spoken Greek were widely used during the period in the areas of education, business and trade, and day-to-day administration of civic affairs. This demoticizing ‚standard™, however, is to be distinguished from the ‚true™ demotic of the period, the latter of which was reflected in the written style of those with minimal formal education. At the other end of the linguistic spectrum, the more classical and archaizing registers of Greek were used by the political and eccle- siastical elite of Constantinople. With respect to the ‚language question™ that would carry over into the twentieth century, progressive factions advocated a ‚demoticized™ modem written language based on the speech of the educated, whereas conservative factions argued that written and spoken language should be separate and distinct, an idea originating in Roman Imperial times. 4.4. Chapter 16: The history of the Modern Greek state, and Chapter 17: The ‚lan- guage question™ and its resolution The recent period of Modem Greek history, from the early 19th to the late 20th century, is characterized by great instability, both politically and sociolinguistically. Chapter 16 focuses on the sociopolitical strife experienced by the Greek nation dur- ing the recent past: sudden and drastic changes in government, from monarchy to fas- cism to democracy, foreign occupations and intervention, military dictatorships, and a devastating civil war. Sociolinguistic developments were analogous, as the so- called ‚language question™ manifested itself as an ongoing struggle between advo- cates of two radically different varieties of the Greek language. Demotic Greek, as a written standard based on the spoken language of the educated classes, was most typ- ically endorsed by progressive educators, whereas Katharevousa, an artificially con- structed and heavily archaized written language with little resemblance to spoken Greek, was typically endorsed by traditional academicians and twice mandated by fascist governments. Chapter I7 further examines the sociolinguistic climate of the period, pinpointing key developments in political, educational, and academic circles which led, in the late 20th century, to the official recognition of Standard Modem Greek, a demoticized middle register based on the spoken language of the educated classes (See Tzartzanos, 1989, for a Greek-language descriptive grammar of Standard Book review I Lingua I1 I (2001) 697-706 705 Modem Greek; see Joseph and Philippi%&Warburton, 1987, and Holton et al., 1997, for English-language descriptive grammars of Standard Modem Greek). In the 19th century, discussion of the language question focused on whether or not contempo- rary spoken Greek could provide a sufficient basis for the formal written varieties required by major state institutions, with proponents, opponents, and moderates equally well represented. In the 20th century, the ‚language question™ was more closely connected to contemporary sociopolitical concerns. A prominent group of educators in Northern Greece, demanding that Demotic Greek be used as the lan- guage of instruction in primary state schools, faced a strong reactionary backlash from fascist governments after the Greek Communist Party officially endorsed Demotic Greek in 1927. For the next five decades, official policy would shift fre- quently and abruptly between Demotic and Katharevousa, thereby creating a con- stant state of linguistic confusion which was especially devastating among school age children (Yiorgos Kalogeras, personal communication). Finally, under the Edu- cation Act of 1974, Standard Modem Greek was adopted as the official language of the Greek nation and remains so through the present time. 5. Assessment and conclusion The book Greek: A history of the language and its speakers is an important con- tribution to the study of Greek language and culture, as it surveys, in one volume, the entire written history of the Greek language, spanning almost 4000 years. Given the broad scope of material covered, the author often refers to the work of specialists in one or another stage of Greek, thus providing the reader with a useful bibliography of additional readings. One of the many strengths of the book is the number and vari- ety of Greek texts presented to document the diachronic evolution of the Greek lan- guage. Horrocks provides examples from both classical and vernacular literature, historical narratives, political decrees, ecclesiastical documents, popular correspon- dence, and many other genres from across the ages. For each text selected, the author includes the original Greek script, followed by a phonetic transcription according to what is known about the spoken language of the time, and then provides both a mor- pheme-by-morpheme interlinear gloss and an English translation of the original Greek text. Furthermore, detailed textual analyses are provided to demonstrate the major linguistic characteristics, phonological, morphosyntactic, syntactic and lexical, of a particular text in a given era. Another major strength of Horrocks™ book is the strong sociocultural focus through which the author conveys the prevailing world view of the times. Horrocks succeeds in depicting the Greek language not only as an inventory of conventional- ized symbolic resources, but also as part of a larger and dynamic cultural system, both shaping and shaped by the people who speak Greek. As a result, the book brings the subject matter to life in a way that a purely linguistic approach may not have paralleled. In my opinion, such an approach is well suited to a wide readership, arousing reader interest in the nonspecialist, while presenting the specialist with a fresh new perspective on a well studied subject. 706 Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 697-706 Because of the broad scope of the book, however, the author is forced by neces- sity to compress a great deal of information in a relatively small number of pages. Because of the amount of historical detail presented, particularly in discussions of less familiar periods of Greek history such as the Byzantine era, particular key events are sometimes difficult to track, especially since the organization of chapters within each section sometimes requires the reader to move between noncontiguous historical periods. While the historical overviews at the beginning of each section are helpful in providing a background context, it might further enhance the exposition to provide the reader with a detailed time line at the beginning of each section, plotting all key events, both linguistic and sociohistorical, that are mentioned in the respec- tive chapter discussions. This small addition could possibly help the reader grasp more readily the big picture which Horrocks sketches by making it immediately clear what the key events are and how they are related in time. All things considered, the book Greek: A history of the language and its speakers presents an inspiring account of the Greek language across the ages, from its Myce- naean past to its current form as Standard Modem Greek. The author™s great enthu- siasm for his subject combined with careful research and an elegant prose style have yielded a remarkable work which is highly accessible yet intellectually invigorating. References Hall, Jonathan M., 1997. Ethnic identity in Creek antiquity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Holton, David, Peter Macktidge and Irene Philipp6kLWarburton, 1997. Creek: A comprehensive gram- mar of the modem language (Routledge Grammars). London: Routledge. Joseph, Brian D., 1983. The synchrony and diachmny of the Balkan infinitive: A study in areal, general, and historical linguistics. London: Cambridge University Press. Joseph, Brian D. and Irene Phihppski-Warburton, 1987. Modem greek (Descriptive Grammar Series). London: Routledge. Palmer, Leonard R., 1980. The Creek language. London: Faber and Faber. T&tzanos, AchiBSas, 1989. Nec-ellinikt Sfntaxis tis Koinfs Dimotikfs (Modem Creek syntax from the spoken Demotic). Thessalontki: Ekdotik6s Ofkos Adelf6n Kyriakfdi. 