L n ua ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001) 629-638 www.elsevier,nl/locate/lingua Book review R.E. Asher and T.C. Kumari, Malayalam. London and New York: Routledge, 1997. xxvi +491 pp. Reviewed by P. Madhavan, Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad, 500 007, India. E-mail madhavan@ciefl.ernet.in Malayalam by R.E. Asher and T.C. Kumary is a book in the Descriptive Gram- mar Series, edited by Bernard Comrie. The series stems from the felt need for com- prehensive descriptive grammars of languages of the world that can be input to work on linguistic theory. With this in view the Lingua Questionnaire was published in 1977. According to the Editorial Statement, common to all volumes in the Series, "for a really fruitful interaction between theoretical and descriptive linguistics, it is essential that descriptions of different languages must be comparable. The question- naire provides a framework for the description of a language that is (a) sufficiently comprehensive to cover the major structures of any language that are likely to be of theoretical interest; (b) sufficiently explicit to make cross-language comparison a feasible undertaking and (c) sufficiently flexible to encompass the range of variety that is found in human language". The book under review conforms to the Ques- tionnaire, which means that the organization for it was predetermined. 1. Organization The Grammars in this series, one notices, have 26 major subjects, grouped under five (unequal) chapters, as follows: Syntax 1.1 General questions 1.2 Structural questions 1.3 Coordination 1.4 Negation 1.5 Anaphora 1.6 Reflexives 1.7 Reciprocals 1.8 Comparison 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: S 0024-3841 (00)00045-0 630 Book review / Lingua 111 (2001) 629-638 1.9 Equatives 1.10 Possession 1.11 Emphasis 1.12 Topic 1.13-14 Heavy shift and other movement rules 1.15 Minor sentence types 1.16 Operational definitions for word classes 2 Morphology 2.1 Inflection 2.2 Derivation 3 Phonology 3.1 Phonological units (segmental) 3.2 Phonotactics 3.3 Suprasegmentals 3.4 Morphophonology (segmental) 3.5 Morphophonology (suprasegmental) 4 Ideophones and Interjections 4.1 Ideophones 4.2 Interjections 5 Lexicon 5.1 Structured semantic fields 5.2 Basic vocabulary Of the 486 pages, 190 are devoted to Syntax and 212 to Morphology, Phonology coming as a distant third with 41 pages. Chapters four and five get just 20 pages between them, and the rest is bibliography and index. I mention this break-up to give a glimpse of what goes into the pages of this fairly sizable volume. Each of these 26 sections enumerated above not only have subsections, but also very narrowly defined sub-subsections. The convention of the numbered key, as explained in the series introduction, serves to make the search easy. In certain cases this can go to as many as eight numbers: take for instance, the subsection bearing the number 1.1.1.2.4.2.1.1 (page 27). The heading says 'Minimum answers to yes/no questions'. The numbering key for this goes as follows: 1.1.1 1.1.1.2 1.1.1.2.4 1.1.1.2.4.1 1.1.1.2.4.1.2 1.1.1.2.4.1.2.1 Sentence types Interrogative sentences Answers Answers as a distinct speech act The form taken by answers Minimum answers to yes/no questions Of these, the table of contents stops with 1.1.1.2.4, a maximum of five. The rea- son for this kind of detailed numbering is obvious - the users of this book can readily cross check for data relating to a particular construction/phenomenon across languages, once there are enough grammars made available in this mode of Book review / Lingua 111 (2001) 629-638 631 presentation. (There are 22 out at the time of publishing of this, as per the informa- tion given in p. iii). 2. Exhaustiveness The Lingua Questionnaire was designed with the explicit purpose of making the grammars as exhaustive as possible. The list of topics above bears ample testimony to this lofty aim. Malayalam is a source book that is indeed a researcher's delight. There are plenty of data covering various aspects of the structure and use of the lan- guage, enriched further by the thoughtful inclusion of subtle dialectal differences. 1853 serially numbered example sentences, mostly in the Syntax chapter, and almost as many unnumbered words, paradigms and phrases in the Morphology and Phonol- ogy chapters - one cannot ask for more. Profuse cross-referencing further enhances the usefulness of the data. To see how useful this is consider Postpositions: postpo- sitions are discussed in five different places, and Postpositional Phrases in five more. All these subsections are cross-referenced in the text; of course, this information is redundantly available in the index, too. To say that Asher and Kumary (AK, hence- forth) have taken great pains to assemble a vast wealth of linguistic information is to state the obvious. This effort strikes us as particularly impressive, given that one of the authors, Asher, is not a native speaker of Malayalam. No praise will adequately reflect the sense of gratitude every Malayalee ought to feel for the stupendous achievement of the authors of Malayalam. Yet, a reviewer's job can't end with saying the obvious. Now I turn to those aspects that I consider as the limitations of the work. As I said earlier, this is meant to serve as an all-in-one source book for any (potential) researcher. It then is a little ironic that by predetermining the format in minute detail (the need for flexiblity recognised in the Editorial Note, notwithstanding) some of the really interesting aspects (from the researcher's point of view) of the language tend to get left out. This, I think, is an inherent problem for a descriptive grammar. Let me explain this. AK have been scrouplously non-committal to any particular theory of grammar, their purpose being just that of description. And there lies the rub. There is no atheoreti- cal or theory-neutral research: it amounts to a contradiction in terms. Be it linguis- tics or any other scientific descipline, research problems are invariably determined by the paradigm one is working in. Take for the sake of illustration, someone work- ing in the framework of generative syntax. Immediately the gaps begin to show. There is a section in the book on quantifiers, where it is noted that the universal quantifier ellaa always has a particle um with it, contiguous or otherwise. But this important piece of information is given in passing, without connecting it to other facts like (a) the urn is the same as the conjunctive particle, and (b) the existential quantifier is analysable into a question word and the disjunctive particle oo. There are also very interesting patterns of syntactic behaviour exhibited by quantifiers, which AK fail to notice: wide scope and narrow scope readings, collective vs. dis- tributive readings, among others. ( See Jayaseelan, 1998, 1999; Hany Babu, 1997, 2000). Or take the binding facts. In their eagerness to remain theory neutral, such a 632 Book review / Lingua 111 (2001) 629-638 well known fact as the (apparent) violation of Principle C of Chomsky (1981) in Malayalam viz., that the proper names can be bound is not mentioned at all! So also, the subject seeking property of Malayalam reflexives, which they share with many a South Asian language. Though there is a very extensive survey of interrogatives, a basic fact about them, namely, that a constituent question from an embedded clause is necessarily clefted finds no mention. It is not a matter of stylistic preference, but a robust grammatical fact on which native speakers have sharp judgements. Simi- larly, even in unembedded structures, the E word (i.e. the question word) has to be to the immediate left of the verb (See Jayaseelan, 1999). These are facts of immense relevance to comparative syntax of the generative ilk, may be of others too. 3. Description and explanation This brings us to a paradox. If a grammar restricts itself to description alone how do you decide on the selection of data. The significance of data is always relative to what aspect of linguistics it can shed light on. For a theory that takes it as an illus- tration of the principle of gravity the fact of apples falling is significant, the fact of apples ripening is not. In a mere description of physical phenomena, there is no way of knowing beforehand what to include and what not to. Research in linguistic the- ory has come to a stage where what constitutes relevant data is fairly clear, far more clear than in the days when the Lingua format was designed. As a concrete case of this tricky issue, I will like to consider the verb classes in Malayalam. As AK report, verbs in Malayalam can be divided into two major classes based on how they form their past tense. The earlier works like Kunjan Pil- lai (1965), Valentine (1986) and Prabodhachandran Nayar (1972) that AK cite all go by this principle in classifying verbs. The larger class, namely roots that end in a vowel/approximant can have several subclasses, and the exact number varies from author to author. But that is not the only basis for verb classification. The syntactic behaviour of the verb offers a sound criterion for class membership. I will illustrate the state of affairs in some detail. In many a verb form cited by AK, there is an augment kk which is linked to the agentivity of the verb in not too transparent a way. (The citation form of verbs have a -uka at the end, which is an infinitive marker.) kura-kk-uka 'bark' paRa-y-uka 'say' ka[i-kk-uka 'bite' muRi-y-uka 'break intr.' ciri-kk-uka 'laugh' niRa-y-uka 'fill intr.' tati-kk-uka 'become fat' viri-y-uka 'blossom' paRa-kk-uka 'fly' kara-y-uka 'cry' sneehi-kk-uka 'love' pott-uka 'break intr.' koopi-kk-uka 'be angry' cett-uka 'slice' The examples above are arranged in two columns: those in the left all have a kk, those in the right do not. (The -y- in some of the examples in the second column is Book review / Lingua 111 (2001) 629-638 633 a glide inserted by a late phonological rule.) This is a possible classification, but does it in any sense amount to a description? Unless something is said about the role of this mysterious augment kk, the knowledge that it exists in some verb stems, but not in others is of little use. Elsewhere one learns that one of the most productive strategies of transitivizing an intransitive, or causativizing a transitive/intransitive is by introducing a kk (along with a vowel -i sometimes, for phonotactic reasons) into the stem. kara-y-uka 'cry' kara-y-i-kk-uka 'make cry' muRi-y-uka 'break intr.' muRi-kk-uka 'break trans.' This fact is evidently related to the presence vs absence of kk in the two sets of verb stems listed above. Even a preliminary description of verb classes has to offer an account of this alternation. However, as it turns out, an attempt at an adequate description will have to address the issue of the argument structure of the verbs. The unaccusative/unergative distinction and the middle construction, not touched upon in any of the earlier studies, as far as I know, become significant. This, in turn, eggs one on to delve deeper, and consider the derived vs non-derived nature of the stem. In what sense is kura-kk-uka 'bark' a derived stem? Interestingly, AK provide a short discussion on this point, essentially following Valentine (1986): "... A nonderived stem is that part of the citation form upto but excluding the final -uka. Derived stems are those formed by the addition of derivational suffixes such as markers of causativity. The allocation of derived stems to one or another verb class is a matter of phonological conditioning. The relevant phonological factor is the nature of the process by which intransitive becomes transitive, or transitive become causative ... All such derived stems end in a double consonant, which at the phonetic level is a long voiceless stop. When this double consonant replaces a single or double consonant, the derived stem belongs to Class I. Where a double consonant is added, the derived stem belongs to Class I if this is -tt-, but to Class II if it is -kk- or -ikk-". (emphasis in the original). (p. 318) What this tells us about derivedness is not at all clear. That a nonderived stem is one from which all derivational suffixes are taken away is a tautology. The morphosyn- tactic character of kk is not properly addressed. A deeper inquiry into the phenome- non can show that a supposedly nonderived stem like kurakkuka 'bark' is derived from the cognate noun kura 'a bark/barking'. Incidentally, this derivational suffix -kk (or -ikk), if properly analysed will help resolve a long standing riddle in Malayalam causatives, reported by AK in p. 279. When a non-causative verb stem like oot-uka is causativized, the following pattern emerges: oot-uka oot-ikk-uka oot-ipp-ikk-uka 'X run' 'Y make X run' 'Z cause Y make X run' What is the second level causative affix? Is it an infix -ipp- or is -ippikk an indivis- ible unit which wipes out the first -ikk? Or is this, as opined by Valentine (1976), 634 Book review / Lingua 111 (2001) 629--638 quoted by AK, a sequence of two suffixes, -ikk in the first cycle and -ipp in the sec- ond, with a rider that when the two come together -ipp must come first? There is quite some controversy. I had proposed a reanalysis of this in Madhavan (1984), where I claim that the causative suffix, whether in first cycle or second cycle, is uni- formly -ikk and that the -ipp is actually the first -ikk changing to -ipp by an Allo- morphy Rule. This can thus be viewed as an instance of Dissimilation, the only one perhaps, in the language. (AK say that there are no cases of Dissimilation reported in Malayalam - well, there seems to be at least one.) In fact AK's Phonology chapter demonstrates the inevitability of theory imping- ing on description. The authors draw liberally on the works of K.P. Mohanan, done in the theoretical framework of Lexical Phonology. They explicitly claim that "though it is possible to recognise a seven way contrast in nasals ... the number of underlying nasals is less than this". (p. 415). To admit an underlying level of rep- resentation is sacrilege for practitioners of some models of phonology who swear by a single surface level. Again, the section on syllable structure and syllabification levels, deal with work done by Prabodhachandran Nayar in the Firthian framework, apart from the 'no coda hypothesis' of Mohanan's. In fact, Malayalam offers the best case study for positing an underlying representation in phonology, and one feels a little cheated when many an interesting phonological process in the lan- guage goes unmentioned in the book. Interestingly, AK say that "Malayalam is a phonologist's paradise", quoting Mohanan (1986). How come then the chapter on phonology is not even one third in length compared to those on syntax and mor- phology? The heart of the matter is that Malayalam has a very rich component of morphophonology: processes that are neither purely phonological nor purely morphological. Yet, AK devote just nine pages to morphophonology ! This also is at least partly caused by the limitations set by the Lingua model. To take one par- ticularly significant example, compounds are dealt with in the Morphology chap- ter, where the morphophonemics happening at the word junction is not at all high- lighted. The most fascinating thing about Malayalam compounds is the morphophonemic changes that accompany compounding, not what categories can be compounded nor what kinds of semantic unpredictability result (see Mohanan, 1986). Some straightforward phonological processes are also inexplicably left out. There is a vowel lowering process, very conspicuous in speech (in almost all dialects, I believe), though not reflected in writing. A short high vowel in the first syllable of a word is usually pronounced as a mid vowel. tu[a --~ tota 'thigh' muna --> mona 'sharp point' ila --> ela 'leaf' viRa --> veRa 'shivering' But if it is followed by a geminate or cluster, or the vowel in the second syllable is also high, this lowering doesn't take effect. Thus kili ' bird' doesn't change to *keli, nor does muli 'hair' become * moll In kuppaayam 'shirt' and cintha 'thought', the following cluster blocks the lowering. Similarly, in speech, some consonants like /1,g,d,r/induce a vowel raising, if they occur word initially. Book review / Lingua Ili (2001) 629-638 635 rama ---> rema 'a name' garlapati ---> gerlapati 'a god' lakshmi ---> lekshmi 'a name' daya ---> deya 'kindness' These two, as many others, ought to have found a place in the book. The description of phonemic segments provided by AK is very accurate and rich in minute articulatory details. The distributional information given for each segment is also very revealing and useful. However, there is one point which I as a native speaker, find completely unacceptable. This has to do with the sound /f/, about which AK say, "lilts position in the language is somewhat marginal, and there are alternative realisations with [ph] , [p] and [~]" (p. 414). In current day Malayalam, there are plenty of English loan words like fan, phone, photo and file and all these are pronounced with a labio-dental (or bilabial in some speakers)/f/. No one pro- nounces it as [ph] or as [p], as far as I know. In p. 13 AK transcribe the English loan word photo as [phool~oo] which I think no native speaker will attest. Apart from the English loan words, there are many proper names among Muslims especially that have a/f/, possibly of Persian origin: Nafeesa, Haneefa, Fathima, etc. The catching on of/f/has actually resulted in the 'mispronunciation' of some names like Phalgu- nan and also some common words like phalam 'result', both of which can be argued to be/ph/originally. It is true that some words like coffee have Malayalam acclima- tizations as kaappi, but they are very few and were coined at a time when the influ- ence of English was negligible in everyday speech; they do not count as evidence for the ascribed ambivalence of the/f/sound in the synchronic Malayalam. 4. Other issues The authors of Malayalam have spared no effort to look up all the existing work in Malayalam linguistics, as can be gathered from the references alluded to in the text. They have drawn on classics like Caldwell (1875) and Rajarajavarma (1895); also they had access to most of the work done in traditional centres of Dravidian lin- guistics like Thiruvananthapuram, Chennai, Annamalai, and also some British uni- versities like Leeds, Cambridge and Edinburgh. But it looks as though they were largely unaware of quite some interesting work done in the generatve paradigm, at the Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad, in the eighties and nineties. I draw this inference because that alone seems to explain the exclusion of any reference say, to the work on anaphors by K.A. Jayaseelan, to give one strik- ing case of this lapse. (It might even be that this was brought to their notice rather late, when the book was going to the press, if the inclusion of some of these in the bibliography is any indication.) I would like to point out that Jayaseelan has to his credit a book entitled Parametric studies in malayalam syntax, which came out in 1999. Let me cite one more specific case of this lacuna. While discussing the issues in verb classification, I had noted with disapproval the insufficient attention paid by AK to the morpho-syntactic role of the augment/suffix -ikk. If they had occasion to learn about the work at Hyderabad, they would definitely have mentioned the 636 Book review / Lingua 111 (2001) 629-638 Allomorphy Rule analysis of the -ipp causative suffix, alluded to earlier, which, in turn, could have enriched the account given. Similarly, I was surprised to note that none of the extremely insightful contributions made by T.B. Venugopala Panikkar of the Calicut University has found a place in Malayalam. I suspect that work on Malayalam written in Malayalam has not been given the importance it deserves. For that matter, Rajarajavarma is referred to only two or three times in the whole book, whereas Valentine, Prabhakara Varier, Mohanan and so on somehow get referred to again and again! 5. Keralapanineeyam In this connection, it is worthwhile comparing this new reference grammar of Malayalam with a grammar written more than a century ago, Keralapanineeyam by A.R. Rajarajavarma in 1895. Whatever its shortcomings, it is still regarded as the most accomplished, comprehensive grammar of Malayalam. True to its model, the astaadhaayi of Panini, Keralapanineeyam dwells at length on the morphophonemics of the language, leaving very little room for the discussion of syntax. All that it pre- sents by way of syntax is a perfunctory account of the case suffixes and an implicit suggestion as to how the karaka theory gtla Panini can handle the occurrence of the verb and its arguments in a sentence. On the other hand, AK begin with the Sentence types: declarative, interrogative, imperative and exclamatory. And then goes on to subordination and coordination. AK also allot much space to direct/indirect speech, though they note that indirect speech is nothing but the verbatim quoting of the speaker's words with the quotative particle enng5 at the end. The kind of structural changes as in the personal pronouns or adverbials of place and time that characterise the English indirect speech is completely absent in Malayalam. This is in line with the organisation typical to English grammars. If one begins by taking English as the type and try to describe other language systems in terms of English, this is bound to happen. Recent findings in generative syntax have actually shown that English is atypical even among the modem European languages: the verb second phenomenon common to the Germanic is absent in English; pro drop present in Italian and Por- tuguese is not there in English, preposition stranding is not possible except in Eng- lish, and so on. That apart, the more important point here, I think, is the latent Euro- centrism that has been guiding the design of the Lingua questionnaire. (The Editor's note does talk of Anglocentrism in generative syntax !) 6. Kannada Before concluding this review I will like to briefly compare Malayalam with another Descriptive Grammar in the same series: Kannada by S.N. Sridhar (1990). Kannada and Malayalam are both Dravidian languages, believed to have sprung from a common source, the Proto Dravidian. Therefore it is natural that the gram- matical structures are very similar. Then, let us look at the treatment of Postpositions Book review / Lingua 111 (2001) 629--638 637 in Malayalam and Kannada closely. Sridhar says that postpositions are derived from nouns by addition of case markers (p. 282). Also, there are several postpositions which are derived from verbs (same page). Sridhar lists a few examples for both. Again while discussing adverbs Sridhar says, "postpositional phrases are among the most common exponents of adverbials". (p. 89). In short, he does not want to give independent categorial status to postpositions. Given below is his operational defin- ition of postpositions: "Postpositions form a semi-closed class, composed mostly of denominal and adverbial elements. They are characterised by their position: they must immediately follow the noun (or noun phrase) that they govern. Their complement nouns (or noun phrases) are usually marked by the genitive case, but indi- vidual postpositions may govern dative or instrumental/ablative case noun phrases ..." (p. 154). Compare this with the operational definition given by AK in Malayalam. "A postposition is an element that can be added to a nominal in one of a subset of the set of case forms to form a postpositional phrase standing in a functional relationship with a verb. Though some postposi- tions are potentially subject to premodification, the set is essentially a closed one. The class of postposi- tions is somewhat heterogenous. Some are denominal and some deverbal in origin. They are neither fully bound or fully free forms and vary somewhat in this respect. Their function is not clearly distinct from that of case suffixes, but they differ from the latter in that part of the definition of a case ending is that it is a fully bound form" (p. 190). AK list as many as 31 postpositions, each with an example sentence (p. 194--197). Later, in Morphology, they give a number of examples of deverbal and denominal derivations of postpositions. Then, postpositional phrases are dealt with separately, in detail (four pages). They define a postpositional phrase thus: "The prototype of a postpositional phrase is a phrase consisting of a postposition preceded by a noun phrase. The head of the noun phrase may be in one of a number of cases depending on the postposition in question". Evidently, AK are thinking of postposition as a dis- tinct syntactic category, even when they talk of their deverbal/denominal origin. Given the close affinities of the two languages, the formal and functional (dis)simi- larities in the system of postpositions is bound to trigger the interest of a compara- tivist. Sridhar's downplaying of postpositions corroborate the point I made earlier: a particular author's stand vis-a-vis theory is bound to influence his choice of data. There is another interesting aspect that emerges from the comparison of Malayalam and Kannada. There are quite a few starred sentences in Kannada, especially in pp. 55-66 , where the author talks about the relativisability of arguments. Malay- alam has hardly any, I could see just three starred structures in the whole book. Con- ventional type grammars do not revel in reeling off ungrammatical sentences, gener- ative grammars do. Not only that, generative grammars are interested in the degrees of ungrammaticalness too. Sridhar's greater exposure to, if not preference for the generative paradigm, I guess, has been instrumental in this data choice. And I take it that the discerning reader will have by now guessed where this reviewer's prefer- ences lie. 638 Book review / Lingua 111 (2001) 629-638 References Caldwell, R., 1875. A comparative grammar of Dravidian or South Indian family of languages. Madras: Madras University. Chomsky, N., 1981. Lectures on goverment and binding. Dordrecht: Foris. Hany Babu, M.T., 1997. Syntax of functional categories. Unpublished doctoral thesis, Central Institute of English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad. Hany Babu, M.T., 2000. Indef'mites and clause structure in Malayalam. Manuscript, Friedrich-Schiller- Universit~it, Jena, Germany. Jayaseelan, K.A., 1998. Blocking effects and the syntax of Malayalam taan. In: R. Singh (ed.), The Yearbook of South Asian Linguistics. London: Sage 11-27. Jayaseelan, K.A., 1999. Parametric Studies in Malayalam. Central Institute of English and Foreign Lan- guages, Hyderabad. Kunjan Pillai, S., 1965-. Malayalam Lexicon. Thiruvananthapuram: University of Kerala. Madhavan, P., 1984. On a putative infixation process in Malayalam causative morphology. Indian Lin- guistics 44, 55~4. Mohanan, K.P., 1986. The theory of lexical phonology. Dordrecht: Reidel. Prabodhachandran Nayar., 1972. Malayalam verbal forms. A phonetic and phonological study. Thiru- vananthapuram: DLA. Rajarajavarma, A.R., 1895. Keralapanineeyam. Kottayam: National Book Stall. Sridhar, S.N., 1990. Kmmada. London: Routledge. Valentine, E., 1986. The inflexional suffixes of Malayalam regular verbs. IJDL 15, 55-82. 