ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Quantifier spreading: Linguistic and pragmatic considerations Hye-Kyung Kang* Department of Phonetics and Linguistics, University College London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK Received 1 June 2000; revised version 5 September 2000 Abstract This paper investigates the idiosyncratic understanding of universal quantifiers such as every, each, or all by English and Korean speaking children, and argues that the phenomenon of 'quantifier spreading' is explicable in terms of the maturation of both the cognitive system and the linguistic system. Evidence for this dual explanation comes from the fact that the visual input, a picture, plays a key role in determining the children's conceptual representa- tion, suggesting the need for the central integration of visual and linguistic elements; and from the fact that a quantifier in the linguistic input has an intrinsic property, i.e. a <+focus> feature. From comparable experiments in four-to-seven year old English and Korean children, two major findings were observed: children's interpretation of quantifying items is affected by syntactic positional and structural cues of the quantifiers; and younger children at the ages of 4 and 5 performed significantly better than older children at the ages of 6 and 7. The for- mer finding is explained by relating it to (universal) island effects determining extraction out of the predicate of a small clause, and the latter finding is claimed to give rise to the classic pattern of a U-shaped developmental curve. On the view that pragmatic considerations are mastered late in acquisition, later than syntactic knowledge, it is assumed that the high rate of spreading errors by older children can be attributed to the interference of pragmatic factors, rather than to lack of grammatical knowledge. It is therefore argued that at least three phases of learning are needed to master universal quantification: first, grammatical knowledge; then, the deployment of pragmatic considerations; and finally, the realisation that pragmatics I am very grateful to Neil Smith, Ad Neeleman, Annabel Cormack, Robyn Carston and Richard Hud- son for their comments and suggestions, and to Tom Fearn for his help with the statistics. I also wish to thank Karen Froud and Myung-Hee Kim for their help in running my experiments and for our enjoyable discussions. Finally I thank all the children, parents and teachers at St. Anthony's RC Primary School in London and HaeWon Kindergarten in Pusan, Korea. * E-mail: h.kang@ucl.ac.uk or hk@hkk.u-net.com 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: S0024-3841 (00)00042-5 592 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 cannot overrule syntax. The current experiments suggest that this mastery is not complete until after 7 years or so. © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Universal quantifiers; Quantifier spreading; Symmetrical interpretation; Exhaus- tive interpretation; Language of thought; Conceptual representation; Island effects; Left- branch; Pragmatic consideration; U-shaped developmental curve I. The phenomenon It is well known that young children tend to give a different interpretation from adults to sentences with universal quantifiers such as every, each and all in certain contexts. For example, in a situation in which there are three agents and three objects such that each of the agents is holding a different object one by one, satisfying some form of visual symmetry, as depicted in (1): (1) Agent-Object Agent-Object Agent-Object children give the same positive response 'yes' as adults do to the following question (2): (2) Is every agent holding an object? However, in the case where another extra object is added to the situation (1), as shown in (3): (3) Agent-Object Agent-Object Agent-Object Object they react to the same question (2) differently from adults. That is, they deny the fact that every agent is holding an object. They give a negative response 'no' to the ques- tion, pointing to the remaining object which is not being held as the reason for their negative response. In the converse situation where there is an extra agent left without an object as in (4): (4) Agent-Object Agent-Object Agent-Object Agent and confronted with the question in (5): H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 593 (5) Is an agent holding every object? children deny that an agent is holding every object because of the presence of the isolated agent. This phenomenon was called Quantifier Spreading by Philip and col- leagues (e.g. 1991, 1994) with the implication that a quantifier attached to one NP applies to all NPs in the sentence. When we compare the above three different conditions, (1), (3) and (4), we get the strong impression that context might affect children's logical thinking about an input sentence containing a quantifier. Condition (1) shows a one-to-one correspon- dence, with which children have no problem. On the other hand, conditions (3) and (4) do not satisfy 'visual symmetry' so that children give a non-adult-like response. The presence of the extra entity is somehow salient in their interpretation. There is a long tradition of study about this behaviour of children with regard to quantification, 1 and researchers have provided different hypotheses and explanations for it. Some treat it as a purely cognitive matter and some try to explain it by lin- guistic principles rather than by general cognitive principles. For example, Inhelder and Piaget (1958, 1964) focused on the development of children's logical compe- tence through their comprehension of universal quantifiers, especially all. They explained this phenomenon in terms of class inclusion errors, and suggested that younger children under the age of seven or eight do not have the ability to divide groups of objects into classes which share common features, rather they tend to group objects by spatial or thematic relations. On the other hand, Roeper and Matthei (1974) tried to explain this phenomenon from a purely linguistic point of view. They suggested that young children treat quantifiers as sentential adverbs, so that the quantifiers are detached from the nouns they belong to, and apply them freely to the other NPs in the sentence. Assuming that quantifiers initially have an adverbial character, and so unselectively bind arguments available in the sentence (cf. Lewis, 1975), Roeper and Matthei's quantifier-as-adverb hypothesis is quite convincing, but it leaves unanswered the question why young children in particular treat quantifiers differently from adults and what causes their unique pattern of inter- pretation. Their hypothesis is established more systematically by Philip (1995). More recently, two different accounts along these lines have been advanced: a linguistic account by Philip (1995), and a non-linguistic account by Crain et al. (1996). In the next section, I will review their accounts and predictions, and point out that each leaves certain phenomena unexplained, suggesting the need for a 'mixed' account, which will simultaneously make other predictions. Then, I will report the details of the current experiments and finally, focusing on the result of the experiments, I will show that the mixed account is more appropriate for dealing with the peculiar treatment of quantification by children. 1 Irthelder and Piaget, 1958, 1964; Donaldson and Lloyd, 1974; Roeper and Matthei, 1974; Bucci, 1978; Freeman et al., 1982; Freeman and Stedmon, 1986; Philip and Takahashi, 1991; Philip and Aure- lio, 1991; Roeper and de Villiers, 1991; Philip, 1991, 1992, 1995; Drozd and Philip, 1992; Boster and Crain, 1993; Philip and Verrips, 1994; Crain et al., 1996; Brooks and Braine, 1996; Drozd, 1998; etc. 594 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591--627 2. Analyses 2.1. A linguistic account: Philip's (1995) event quantification hypothesis Philip (1995) tries to explain this peculiar behaviour by children with regard to universal quantification by introducing the event quantification hypothesis. He suggested that preschool children interpret universal quantifiers as modifying entire events rather than specific noun phrases, implying that children prefer per- fect one-to-one correspondence when interpreting universal quantifiers. That is, to children, unlike adults, the domain of quantification consists of all minimal events which include the agent and the goal (or object) involved in the event. For preschool children, for example, the sentence Every boy is riding a pony is true only if every event consists of an individual boy who is riding a pony. Hence, in their representation of a structure which entails that for every event such that a boy or a pony is involved, the event consists of a boy who is riding a pony. All such events are possible component subevents of an event of 'a boy riding a pony'. Therefore, they respond in the negative to a sentence in a context in which there are three boys riding a pony each and there is an extra pony, not being ridden by a boy. The pony which is not being ridden by a boy is not involved in the event so that it cannot be the case that, for all candidate boy-ride-pony-events, a boy is riding a pony. This hypothesis assumes that each individual object is construed as being part of an event as well as an individual and that children prefer perfect one-to-one correspondence between each subevent when interpreting universal quantifiers. On this linguistic account, children have a non-adult semantics which suggests that children and adults exploit different logical forms. The logical forms for chil- dren and adults for the sentence Every boy is riding a pony are represented by Philip as in (6) and (7): (6) Child logical forms for the sentence Every boy is riding a pony. (Philip, 1995: 44) a. Symmetrical interpretation S Q restriction I Ve PART (boy,e) or PART (pony,e) nuclear scope a boy is riding (e) a pony 'All minimal events in which either a boy or a pony (or both) is a participant are events in which a boy is riding a pony.' H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 595 b. Exhaustive interpretation S Q restriction Ve PART (boy,e) or PART (pony,e) or PART (perceived object,e) nuclear scope a boy is riding (e) a pony 'All minimal events in which either a boy or a pony (or both) is a participant, or in which any perceived object is a participant, are events in which a boy is rid- ing a pony.' Philip distinguished interpretations by children with regard to the domain of quan- tification into two types: symmetrical interpretation as shown in (6a); and exhaus- tive interpretation as shown in (6b). The child who gives a symmetrical interpreta- tion (6a) is called 'the Symmetry Child' and the child who gives an exhaustive interpretation is called 'the Perfectionist Child'. Whereas the Symmetry Child deter- mines the restricted domain of quantification solely on the basis of the linguistic input, i.e. including boy and pony in the relevant set of objects and events, the Per- fectionist pays attention to nonlinguistic information in the visual input, so that the perceived object, although not mentioned, is also included in the relevant set of objects and events as a restriction. On the other hand, adult logical form for the sentence is as in (7), where the restricted domain of quantification includes only boy: (7) Adult logical form for the sentence Every boy is riding a pony. S Q restriction nuclear scope Vx boy (x) pony-rider (x) 'For all objects x, such that x is a boy, x is riding a pony.' The child logical forms in (6) are then argued to be similar to the adult logical form for adverbial quantification, as in (8): 596 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 (8) Adult logical form for the sentence The dogs always eat the cat's food. S Q restriction nuclear scope Ve R(e) the dogs eat(e) the cat's food 'All events in which R holds are events in which the dogs eat the cat's food.' (e.g. R=when the cat is fed in the house) The child assigns to a sentence such as Every boy is riding a pony the logical form which an adult assigns to a sentence containing a single adverb of quantification, e.g. The dogs always eat the cat's food. As is well known (e.g. de Swart, 1991), adver- bial quantifiers typically bind events or situations. Misconstruing a determiner as an adverbial quantifier, therefore, entails that the quantificational element in question winds up binding events or situations. In this sense, Philip's account, which asserts that determiners are misanalyzed as adverbial quantifiers, just as argued by Roeper and Matthei (1974), has the advantage that it analyzes this phenomenon within the bounds of UG. It predicts that the spreading phenomenon occurs across tasks in any language because it is believed that children have a non-adult semantics. However, it fails to explain why children have a different representation for interpreting the quantifiers from the one adults do, and how children's logical form is changed onto- genetically into the adults'. 2.2. A non-linguistic account: Crain et al. (1996) In contrast to Philip's hypothesis, Crain et al. (1996) argue that children's sym- metrical interpretations are errors due to flaws in experimental design, and claim that children have no difficulty with the interpretation of quantifiers if 'felicitous' con- texts are provided. That is, they argue that children's non-adult-like responses are induced because the picture task employed in the previous research does not satisfy the appropriate felicity conditions for the test sentences. To prove this, they carried out several experiments, of which one replicated those of previous experiments from Piaget to Philip, and the others used a different methodology, the Truth Value Judge- ment Task, which, they believe, satisfies 'the condition of plausible dissent'. The condition of plausible dissent asserts that the negation of the proposition in the ques- tion can also be a possible outcome so that it has to be presented explicitly in the context. They assume that if this condition is satisfied, the presence of an extra object in the context should not influence the interpretation children assign to the tar- get test question. Experiments 1 and 2, from their seven experiments, are briefly introduced here. The first part of Experiment 1 replicates previous research, using the same methodology with pictures corresponding to the Extra Object Condition in which, H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591--627 597 for example, three farmers are each feeding a different donkey and there is an extra donkey not being fed. Among 34 children ranged in age from 3;0 to 5;10 with a mean age of 4;4, there was found a group of 14 children who gave symmetrical responses 82% of the time. This group of children answered 'no' to questions like Is every farmer feeding a donkey ? in the Extra Object Condition, pointing to the extra donkey as the reason for their negative responses. Crain et al. used these 14 children in their second experiment, which used the Truth Value Judgement task, to find out whether the satisfaction of plausible dissent can reduce or eliminate the symmetrical interpretation. In this task, short stories are acted out with toys and props by one experimenter. The stories are watched by a child and a puppet, Kermit the Frog, which is played by a second experimenter. After each story, Kermit the Frog says what he thinks happened in the story. The child is asked to indicate whether Kermit's description of the story is true or false. If Kermit is cor- rect, according to the child, the child pretends to feed him something tasty, but if Ker- mit says something that did not happen in the story, the child pretends to feed him something nasty to remind him to pay closer attention. Whenever Kermit says the wrong thing, the child is encouraged to explain to him 'what really happened' in the story. Here is the example of the story in Experiment 2 (Crain et al., 1996: 126): (9) Characters and crucial props Three skiers ( a mom and her two girls) Five bottles of soda and five cups of apple cider A Styrofoam mountain, with an arch to ski through Protocol Exp: In this story, this mom and her two girls go skiing. They're going to ski down this mountain here and try to ski through this arch. Over here are the drinks at the ski lodge for when they've finished skiing. First, they all go on the ski lift to the top of the mountain. Then, this girl skis down the mountain. Girl 1: This looks a bit scary. Here I go! Whee! Oops, here comes the arch. Yeah I made it! <first girl skis down the mountain, and safely through the arch>. Girl 2: Now it's my turn. Whee! Oops, I nearly fell. But I made it. Yeah! <second girl skis down the mountain and safely through the arch>. Mom: OK girls, watch me. Whee! Oh wow, I didn't realize this arch was so low, I'll have to really bend down to make it through <morn skis down mountain, but barely makes it through the arch>. Oh girls, that gave me a real fright. I almost banged into the arch. Let's go in now and get a drink <mom and girls go over to drinks set out on a table>. I'll have a cup of this nice hot apple cider. This will help calm me down <mom takes a cup of cider>. Girl 1 : Oh, look at these sodas. I want this bottle of orange soda. Girl 2: I want this bottle of cola. Mom: Girls, don't take a bottle of soda. You should have a cup of hot apple cider so you get nice and warm. You can have soda another time. 598 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 Girl 1 : OK. I'll take this cup, it's full to the top. Girl 2: I want a full cup too. Are any of these other cups of cider full? Oh, this one looks very full. I'll have this one. Mmm, it's good. Kermit: That was a hard story, but I think I know something that happened. Every skier drank a cup of hot apple cider. Child: Yes. or No, not these cups of apple cider. (symmetrical interpretation) In the results, twelve of the 14 children who had consistently given symmetrical interpretations in Experiment 1 responded 'yes' on all four trials of this experiment. Even the remaining two children, who rejected the target sentences, are claimed to have done so not because they assigned a symmetrical interpretation to the target sentences, but because Kermit's statements used every to refer to sets with three or fewer members. They are reported as insisting that Kermit should specify the exact number of individuals, for example, Three skiers drank a cup of hot apple cider, and in the follow-up session in which there were five characters corresponding to the quantified NP every skier, they accepted sentences with the universal quantifier. From the contrasting results of Experiments 1 and 2, Crain et al. argue that when felicitous contexts are presented, the symmetrical interpretation by children is elimi- nated. In the story they used, for example, the mother takes a cup of apple cider, but the children are tempted by the sodas. The mother persuades the children to drink apple cider instead, because it will help warm them up. The children each have a cup of apple cider. In this situation, Crain et al. argue that it is felicitous to say 'yes' to Kermit's description Every skier drank a cup of hot apple cider because the negation of the sentence was under consideration. Further they mention that the situation also falsifies the symmetrical interpretation of the test sentences because there were extra cups of hot apple cider left over at the end of the story and the extra cups were even highlighted in the story by the children checking that the cups of apple cider were filled to the top. Therefore they conclude that children have full grammatical knowl- edge of universal quantification and the non-adult-like responses with regard to uni- versal quantification reported by previous research are due to flaws in the experi- mental design, that is, the non-satisfaction of felicitous contexts. Their argument may be correct, but my original interest in this subject started from the different interpretation by children from adults in relevant contexts, for example, the extra object condition. My main concern has been to find out why young children typically give an interpretation different from adults about the non- symmetrical one-to-one relationship between agent and object. In this respect, Crain et al.'s real time toy acting performance has a different motivation so that their methodology is not relevant in the current experiments. I am here focusing on chil- dren's interpretation of static images such as pictures, that is, the difference between children and adults in their interpretation of such static images, and how this affects universal quantification. Focusing on their inability to deal with infelicitous contexts, I am interested here in investigating how well immature children deal with these infelicitous contexts, compared to adults, and what factors cause their 'mistake' in universal quantification. Something must be different in the development of their H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 599 logical thinking or linguistic knowledge. To answer the questions, I myself carried out comparable experiments in English and Korean with regard to children's inter- pretation of universal quantifiers. In the next section, I will report the details of the experiments and focusing on the experimental results, I will show that a mixed account, that is, a cognitive and linguistic account, has to be considered for dealing with the peculiar behaviour of quantification by children. 3. Experiments: English and Korean children 3.1. Subjects Experiment I included 59 English primary school children ranging in age from 4;5 to 7;5 with a mean age of 5;8 and Experiment II included 62 Korean kinder- garten and primary school children in Korea ranging in age from 4;3 to 7;7 with a mean age of 5 ;6. 3.2. Aims The aim of these experiments was to replicate the phenomenon of quantifier spreading which young children show in their comprehension of universal quanti- tiers such as every, each and all (and also their Korean equivalents modun 2 , kakkak- uy and modun NP-tul). 3 Throughout the experiments, however, I wanted to see what happens in different age groups and different syntactic positions or structures, which were not paid attention to by previous research, and find out what causes the errors. First of all, to fmd out whether strictly linguistic factors are operative in this phe- nomenon; for example, whether there is evidence of the universal island effect, I made some variations in the test sentences, using different syntactic positions, with quantifiers in subject position or in object position; and different structures, transitive or intransi- tive. Firstly, I investigated the effect of varying the relative order of quantified NPs and indefinite NPs in the simple sentences to see if there were directionality effects.4 2 Korean also has universal quantifiers with functions similar to the English quantifiers. It contains strong and weak quantifiers with semantic properties like English, and most quantifiers in Korean can float in a sentence like adverbials, such as all or each in English. The Korean equivalent of every is modun; of each is kakkak(-uy); and of all is modwu (in the case of the use as an adverbial) or modun (in the case of the use as a modifying adjective). The Korean quantifier nwukwun~a might be considered to be equivalent to English every here in light of its individual property, rather than bearing a group mean- ing, but it is not included because it is generally used to modify 'persons', so that its use with animals or things sounds awkward, and likewise, because it is only used as a floated quantifier. 3 -tul is the plural marker in Korean. However, in Korean plural expressions both with and without the plural marker are acceptable. Here the Korean equivalent of English every is spelt out as modun and that of all as modun (NP)-tul, though the contrast in Korean is one of preference rather than strict grammaticality. 4 Philip and Aurelio (1991) tried to find out if there was any effect on the incidence of quantifier spreading of placing the universal quantifier every in syntactic object position as opposed to subject posi- tion. They found very high rates of spreading errors in both cases, every/a and a/every, but no significant difference between them: 84% spreading errors in the former and 90% in the latter. 600 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591--627 The phenomenon of right spreading (or forward spreading) with the order of uni- versal quantifiers every (modun), each (kakkak) and all (modun -tul) in subject position and a singular noun in object position, and the phenomenon of left spreading (or backward spreading) with a singular noun in subject position and universal quantifiers in object position were controlled in this experiment. Sec- ondly, the difference in children's performance between structures with a transi- tive verb and an intransitive verb with a prepositional phrase was examined. Finally, comparing the results from the English and Korean experiments, I exam- ined whether the same phenomenon is found in the interpretation by English and Korean children. On the other hand, to find out the function of pragmatic (cognitive) factors, vari- ous conditions were set up in which one or two odd entities were included. 5 Some contexts elicit the positive response 'yes' as their right answer and some elicit the negative response 'no' as their right answer to the relevant stimulus sentences. Those contexts with stimulus sentences which result in a positive or a negative response as their right answer were administered randomly to each child, so that he or she had the opportunity to face both positive and negative situations. 3.3. Test sentences and control contexts All the test sentences were composed of simple structures with a transitive verb or an intransitive verb with a prepositional phrase. The test sentences were classified into four groups according to the variances: Group 1 (RT): Group 2 (RINT): Group 3 (LT): Is/Are every ~each~all (the) bear(s) holding a honeypot? (Eng- lish) 6 modun/kakkak-uy/modun kom(tu/)-i kkultong-ul tulgo isseoyo? (Korean) Is/Are every ~each/all (the) ladybird(s) on a caterpillar? modun/kakkak-uy/modun moodangbulle(tul)-ka/-i ebulle-uye isseoyo? Is a bear holding every ~each~all (the) honeypot(s)? kom-i modun/kakkak-uy/modun kkultong(tu/)-ul tulgo isseoyo? 5 I start with the assumption that children have some knowledge of quantifiers as modifiers or natural language binders (but not as functional heads). As was discussed in the beginning of this paper, children have no difficulty in theft interpretation of a context which depicts a symmetrical one-to-one correspon- dence between agents and objects. Further, Brooks and Braine (1996) found that 4 to 10-year-old chil- dren have little difficulty restricting the quantifier all to the noun it modifies. It is therefore assumed that the odd entities in the visual input, the picture, clearly play an important role in their interpretation, so that the six control contexts here all include one or two odd entities to find out how the children's inter- pretation of quantifiers is affected by its (or their) existence. 6 The same types of sentences were constructed for the different pictures by substituting the relevant words. For example, the sentence Is every caterpillar carrying a ladybird? was made for the picture [caterpillar-ladybird] and Is every train pulling a coach ? for the picture [train-coach]. H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 601 Group 4 (LINT): RT: RINT: LT: LINT: Is there a baby behind every ~each~all (the) mummy elephant(s)? aki khokkiri-ka modun/kakkak-uy/modun umma khokkiri(tul) tuye isseoyo? Right Spreading-Transitive Right Spreading-Intransitive Left Spreading-Transitive Left Spreading-Intransitive Six different control contexts were prepared: Context 1 : Context 2: Context 3: Context 4: Context 5: Context 6: Extra object and extra different agent (There are three bears holding a honeypot each, an extra honeypot not being held, and a piglet alone.) Different agent (visual symmetry) (Three bears are holding a honeypot each, and a piglet is also holding a honeypot.) Many to one, extra different agent (There are three bears, among which just one bear is holding all three honeypots and the other two are not, just standing, and a piglet alone.) Extra agent (There are four bears, among them three bears are holding a honeypot each, and a bear alone without a honeypot.) Different object (visual symmetry) (There are four bears, in which three bears are holding a honeypot each and one bear is holding a bunch of flowers.) Many to one, extra object and extra different agent (There are three bears, among them just one bear is holding three honeypots and the other two are not, just standing, a piglet alone, and an extra honeypot not being held.) For the sentences belonging to Group 1, Contexts 1 and 2 have the positive (adult) response 'yes', but Contexts 3, 4, 5 and 6 have the negative (adult) response 'no'. In contrast, in the case of the sentences of Group 2, Contexts 3, 4 and 5 yield 'yes' as the right answer, but Contexts 1, 2 and 6 yield 'no' as the right answer. For the sen- tences of Group 3, Contexts 3, 4 and 5 yield 'yes' as the right answer, but Contexts 1, 2 and 6 give the negative response 'no'. Finally, for the sentences of Group 4, Contexts 1 and 2 have 'yes' as the right answer, but Contexts 3, 4, 5 and 6 have 'no' as the fight answer. 3.4. Materials and procedures Children were shown pictures individually and asked yes/no questions via the use of a tape-recorder. There were 24 pictures corresponding to the six control con- texts: the sets of [bear and honeypot]; [caterpillar and ladybird]; [train and coach]; 602 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 and [baby and mummy elephant]. The same pictures were used in Experiments I and II. When the experimenter showed a picture, the child was encouraged to describe the picture by asking questions such as What can you see here ?, What are they doing ?, How many bears are there ?, How many honeypots are there ?, etc. Children normally enumerated each item in the picture, for example, "this bear (pointing to each item with their finger) is holding a honeypot, this bear is holding a honeypot, this bear is holding a honeypot as well, but this honeypot has no bear, there is no bear on this honeypot, or nobody is holding this honeypot, and this piglet is alone, he is not holding a honeypot, he is lonely," etc. Therefore it is clear that the children were conscious of the details of the picture before they listened to the test question. In this respect, the negation of the proposition in the question, that is, "the condition of plausible dissent" which is suggested by Crain et al. (1996), can be said to be under consideration. Further, for the proposition 'every bear is holding a honeypot' derivable from the sentence Is every bear holding a honeypot ?, the Context 3, 4, 5 or 6 each provides a situation which demonstrates the negation of the proposition. When those contexts were shown to each child, s/he described them, using the nega- tion, for example, "these two bears are not holding a honeypot, this bear is holding all the honeypots, and also this piglet is not holding a honeypot" for Context 3; "this bear is not holding a honeypot" for Context 4; and "this bear is not holding a hon- eypot, he is holding flowers" for Context 5, and so on. The children spontaneously observed that not every bear is holding a honeypot in those contexts. Then the other experimenter played the question on the tape recorder. When a child was not sure of the answer, the question was repeated. When a child answered 'no', the follow-up questions 'Why not?' or 'Why did you say "no"?' were asked. The responses were ticked 'yes' or 'no', and notes were jotted down on the blank side of the test paper. All the responses and comments by each child were also tape-recorded. The interviews were carried out on two separate occasions with an interval of around one week between each session. Thirty-five simple questions, each with dif- ferent pictures, were asked of a child in one session in the order of the sets [bear-honeypot], [caterpillar-ladybird], [train-coach] and [baby-mummy elephant]. Among the thirty-five questions, around ten questions were distracting sentences which were inserted into every two or three main test sentences. These were to pre- vent children from giving stereotyped responses to the test questions, and also by giving simple sentences which require general knowledge, to get an idea whether they were rational in their responses to the questions, for example, How many red stars are there?, Which circle is the biggest?, What sign is this?, etc. 3.5. Results One of the general findings from both Experiments is that in the case where the right answer was 'no', that is, in the case of pictures which did not correspond to the stimulus sentence, the majority of children responded correctly, giving the negative response 'no'. The use of 'false pictures' induces clear negative responses. On the other hand, when the right answer was 'yes', i.e., in the case of pictures which agree H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 603 with the test sentence, high figures of quantifier spreading errors were found. The second general finding is that no significant difference was found between the quan- riflers every (modun), each (kakkak) and all (modun NP-tul). Further, no distinction was found in sex (boy and girl), in the session (lst and 2nd) or in the four different picture sets: bear-honeypot; caterpillar-ladybird; train--coach; and baby-mummy elephant. In both Experiments I (English) and II (Korean), however, differences between the error rates for the different age groups were found: 6 and 7 year old children showed more symmetrical and exhaustive interpretations of all types of test sen- tences than the younger 4 and 5 year old children did. Table 1 shows the details of the four different age groups and error rates in Experiments I and II: Table 1 Details of the four different age groups and error rates: Experiment I and Experiment II (shown in paren- theses) Age group No. of subjects Mean age (yr;mth) Error rate (%) 4 9 (15) 4;8 (4;5) 45 (44) 5 26 (27) 5;6 (5;4) 71 (60) 6 18 (16) 6;7 (6;3) 80 (83) 7 6 (4) 7;2 (7;1) 83 (83) For the four different age groups, as shown in Table 1, the overall error rates from Experiment I are 45% in the four year old group (9 children); 71% in the five year old (26); 80% in the six year old (18); and 83% in the seven year old (6). There are significant differences between the error rates for the different ages (p = 0.002), with the evidence for this coming from the difference between the 4-year-olds and the rest (no significant differences are found between the rest). The statistical analysis was 'a one way analysis of variance on the logistically transformed error rates for the 59 children with age as a 4-level factor'. Similar differences are also found in Experi- ment II. The error rates are 44%, 60%, 83% and 83% in the order of the four age groups, 4 (15 children), 5 (27), 6 (16) and 7 (4). The differences are similar to the English data, with an overall test for differences giving p < 0.001, and now we have significant differences (with p < 0.05) between the 4-year-olds and each of the oth- ers, and between the 5-year-olds and each of the others (but not between 6 and 7). As shown in Table 1, the pattern of error rates is basically the same in both exper- iments, with 4 < 5 < 6&7 in the order of the degree of spreading errors, it is just that the 5 versus 6 comparison is significant for the Korean children, but does not quite reach significance for the English data. What is of interest here is that the older chil- dren made more spreading errors than the youngest. This fmding will be discussed in the next section with relation to the emergence of pragmatic considerations in acquisition. Overall, children in both Experiments I and II showed high rates of quantifier spreading; with an average 71% errors in the former and 65% in the latter. In Exper- iment I, 51% (59 out of 115 trials) right spreading errors were found in the case of 604 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 transitive sentences; 72% (79/110) right spreading errors in the case of intransitive sentences; 73% (123/169) left spreading errors in the case of transitive sentences; and 86% (95/110) left spreading errors in the case of intransitive sentences. Simi- larly, in Experiment II, 38% (44/117) right spreading errors were found in the case of transitive sentences; 66% (75/114) right spreading errors in the case of intransi- tive sentences; 70% (124/176) left spreading errors in the case of transitive sen- tences; and 78% (87/112) left spreading errors in the case of intransitive sentences. The details are shown in Table 2: Table 2 Error rates in percentages between right/left spreading and transitive/intransitive constructions from Experiments I and II Sentence types Error rates (%) Experiment I (English) Experiment II (Korean) Group 1: RT 51 38 Group 2: RINT 72 66 Group 3: LT 73 70 Group 4: LINT 86 78 The percentage figures in the table are summed figures across children. The details of individual responses are shown in Appendix A. As shown in Table 2, in both experiments, left spreading errors were found to be significantly higher than right spreading errors: 73%>51% in Experiment I; and 70%>38% in Experiment II. According to the p-values test using 'Binary Logistic Regression', p = 0.002 in Experiment I; and p < 0.001 in Experiment II. Significantly higher spreading errors were also found in the case of the intransitive verb phrases than in the case of tran- sitive verb phrases in both experiments: p = 0.002 in Experiment I; and p = 0.004 in Experiment II. More interestingly, the pattern of significant difference between right/left and transitive/intransitive in Experiment I is parallel to the one in Experi- ment II, as shown in Table 3. Table 3 Log odds: Right vs. left; transitive vs. intransitive in Experiments I and II Sentence type Experiment I (English) Experiment II (Korean) Right vs. left -1.12 (0.36)p = 0.002 -1.53 (0.40)p < 0.001 Trans vs. intrans -1.08 (0.35) p = 0.002 -1.13 (0.39) p = 0.004 The figures in Table 3 are log odds ratios, from the logistic regression analysis, for the right-left and transitive-intransitive comparisons, with their standard errors in brackets. That is, the first (second) row shows the natural log of the ratio of the odds of an error in a right spreading (transitive) case to the odds of an error in a left spreading (intransitive) case. That is, left spreading gives more errors than right H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591--627 605 spreading, so the odds of an error for left are greater than for right, so the ratio of the odds (right/left) is less than 1, so its log is negative. Similarly intransitive gives more errors than transitive so the log odds ratio (trans/intrans) is also negative. They are not significantly different between the two experiments, as can be seen by compar- ing the differences with the standard errors: the differences in log odds ratios being -1.12-(-1.53) = 0.41 (se 0.54, p = 0.45); and -1.08-(-1.13) = 0.05 (se 0.52, p = 0.92) respectively. ('se' stands for the standard errors of difference calculated.) The differences between right and left spreading, and between transitive and intransitive sentences are clear from a comparison of the individual children's per- formance on different stimulus sentences (see the details in Appendix A). To spec- ify, in Experiment I, for control group 1 (the case of right spreading), 16 out of 59 children got all their answers correct and 15 children got all the answers wrong. On the other hand, for control group 3 (the case of left spreading), only 6 children got all their answers correct and 30 children got all their answers wrong. Similarly, for control group 2 (the case of right spreading with an intransitive verb), 10 children got all their answers right and 31 children got them all wrong, whereas for control group 4 (the case of left spreading with an intransitive verb), only 1 child got her answer right and 42 children got all their answers wrong. To compare the figures themselves, 16 vs. 6 and 10 vs. 1, or 15 vs. 30 and 31 vs. 42 are significant differ- ences. The same phenomenon is also found in Experiment II. For control group 1, 26 out of 62 children got all their answers correct and 13 children got all their answers wrong. On the other hand, for group 3, only 9 children got them all right and 30 chil- dren got them all wrong. For group 2, 13 children got them all right and 30 children got them all wrong, whereas for group 4, only 6 children got them all right and 39 children got them all wrong. The numbers of children who got all their answers cor- rect are significantly more in the case of right spreading than in the case of left spreading, and also more in the case of transitive constructions than in the case of intransitive constructions in both experiments. This difference in the syntactic posi- tional and structural cues will be discussed in the next section with relation to the universal island effects. 4. Discussion The present experiments provide evidence that the phenomenon of quantifier spreading is consistently observed in the age group from four to seven in both Eng- lish and Korean children. Focusing on two major findings, that is, the difference in the error rates between the quantifiers in subject position and in object position of a verb or a preposition; and the difference between the four age groups, I will here dis- cuss this phenomenon from both linguistic and cognitive points of view. 4.1. Linguistic considerations First of all, on the linguistic side, it is claimed that the phenomenon might be influenced by the (universal) island effect of syntactic detachment. Concentrating on 606 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 the main concern, significant differences in the errors were found in both Experi- ments I (English) and II (Korean) between some of the variations controlled for: for example, the position of the universal quantifier in the sentence, that is, its placement in subject position (right spreading) vs. in object position (left spreading); and the difference between sentences with a transitive verb vs. those with an intransitive verb and pre/postpositional phrase. The asymmetry between subject DPs and object DPs has been widely discussed in the relevant literature, and can be related to our experimental results, regarding the difference in children's interpretation of quantifiers in subject position and in object position. That is, young children made significantly higher errors in the latter than in the former (see Table 2 for the comparisons). The preference for left spreading over right spreading has perhaps little to do with left/right linear order, but may be due to the relative ease of detachment from the object rather than from the subject. This is reflected in island effects (universally) where the subject (unlike the object) is typi- cally an island. Huang's (1982) CED (the Condition on Extraction Domains) asserts that adverbial phrases and subject NPs constitute islands for extraction. Further, from van Kampen's (1997) data we found that subextractions in child grammar occur only out of direct object DPs and predicative DegPs, not out of subject DPs. Another alternative interpretation of this experimental result is that a quantifier in subject position can be easily mis/re-analyzed as being generated separately from the subject DP, on a par with adverbial quantifiers (suggested by Ad Neeleman, p.c.), as in (10): (10) every~ V O As represented in (10), the quantifier every, like an adverbial, can be base generated in the top position of the sentence without any need for appeal to movement. However, contrary to the situation with the attachment of adverbs, I assume that quantifiers in object position cannot be independently generated as those in subject position can be. To have sentential scope, they have to raise to the top of the sen- tence by movement, as shown in (11): H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 607 (11) V every O I Under this analysis, the experimental results of quantiflers in subject and object posi- tions have to be treated separately. That is, children have to learn two kinds of gram- matical fact with regard to universal quantification: (i) they have to learn the status of the quantifier as a functional head of DP so that it has to be positioned inside DP; and (ii) they have to learn the Left-Branch Condition which specifies that movement of a left-branch element is possible only by pied-piping the entire phrase. Once they learn the requirement (i) above, right spreading errors would disappear, and then when they master both requirements (i) and (ii), left spreading errors would disap- pear. The present experiments indicate that children in the range of ages four to seven are at the stage of learning requirement (i) (though the existence of right spreading errors shows that they have not mastered it completely), but from the evi- dence of the high rates of left spreading errors, not both of the requirements (i) and (ii). The detachment of the quantifier from the phrase in object position of the verb (in transitive constructions) is comparable to the detachment of the quantifier from the object of the preposition in intransitive constructions. Both are markedly easier than detachment from the subject. That is perhaps why the children involved in the cur- rent experiments showed more spreading errors in structures where quantiflers are in the object position of the verb (e.g. Is a bear holding every honeypot?) or of the preposition (e.g. Is a ladybird on every caterpillar?) in the intransitive construction, than in the transitive construction where the quantifier is in the subject position (e.g. Is every bear holding a honeypot?). That is, the semantic detachment might be influ- enced by the (universal) island effect of syntactic detachment. The difference in the current experiments between transitive and intransitive sen- tences, that is, the finding that significantly higher errors were found in the case of intransitive sentences than the transitive sentences, can also be explained in the framework of general syntactic theory. That is, while the transitive sentences include accusative verbs such as hold, carry and pull, the intransitive sentences involve unaccusative verbs, in our case the copular verb be. For example, in the sentence Is there a baby behind every mummy elephant?, 'a baby behind every mummy ele- phant' constitutes a small clause and the quantifier every is inside the predicate of the small clause, as shown in (12): 608 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 (12) S DP VP V SC is a baby Pred behind every mummy elephant It is well known that an element inside a small clause predicate can be extracted out of it. For example, (13) a. Whati do you consider John good at t i b. Whoi do you consider John a friend of tg In (13a), what is extracted out of the predicate of a small clause, and similarly, in (13b), who is extracted out of it. This kind of extraction from a small clause, what- ever the syntactic condition is, is well justified in the relevant literature. If we approach our phenomenon in the light of this analysis, the high number of spreading errors by children which was found in the case of intransitive sentences can be accounted for. That is, the extraction of the quantifier every from inside the predicate of the small clause can be motivated in the same way as the extraction of what and who in (13). The finding that the children involved in the current experiments showed signifi- cantly higher errors in the case of intransitive sentences than in the case of transitive sentences does not support Philip and Aurelio's (1991) finding: no difference was found between right and left spreading. They found very high rates of spreading errors in both cases: 84% of right spreading and 90% of left spreading. However, they did not use the same constructions to test for directionality effects. They used intransitive sentence (Is every mouse in a cup ?) in the case of right spreading and transitive sentence (Is a dog holding every bone?) in the case of left spreading. On the evidence of the current study the degree of right/left spreading errors is not com- parable because children are sensitive to the structural cue, i.e., transitive vs. intran- sitive. Focusing on the difference between children and adults in their grammatical knowledge of universal quantifiers, it is assumed that children know the grammati- cal function of the quantifier as a lexical category, i.e., a quantifier is a binder or a modifier, but they might be not yet aware of its syntactic function as a determiner, that is, as a functional head of the determiner phrase which influences the interpre- tation of universal quantifiers. Specifically, in adult grammar, the quantifier is treated as a functional head with its own complement within its own extended H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 609 projection. The quantifier itself, as a left-branch element, cannot be moved out of its extended projection and if it has to be moved, the whole quantifier phrase (Q+NP) has to be moved. However, in child grammar, the functional category DP (or QP) seems not to be completely developed at this stage and thus the D-element is freely detached from the category which it belongs to and raised to the highest position to range over all arguments available in the sentence. Therefore it is claimed that young children seem to treat a universal quantifier such as every, each or all as a modifier which is dominated by the maximal projection NP as in (14), not as a functional head D of DP as in (15), as adults do: (14) NP (15) DP ModP NP D NP every bear every bear In (14) the quantifier every occurs in the adjoined position as a modifier, but in (15) it heads a functional projection DP. According to this modifier view, the relationship between every and bear is not one between a head and a complement, that is, every is not treated as a projecting head, but as a natural language binder which modifies the noun bear. Therefore, in the children's interpretation universal quantifiers can be separated from their complement and raised to the highest position of the sentence to get sentential scope. This modifier view can be supported by crosslinguistic data which show the subextraction of a left-branch element out of its own extended projection: for example, Doetjes et al.'s (1998) analysis with regard to the migratory property of some degree expressions (such as more, less and enough as modifiers); the cate- gorial status of demonstratives in Rumanian and Modem Greek in the analysis of Giusti (1997) and also in Korean (demonstratives as modifiers of the noun); and children's naturalistic language data in their acquisition of Dutch (cf. van Kam- pen, 1997; Hoekstra and Jordens, 1994) and their misplacement of expressions with special stress (e.g. 'Only I want this one' for the sentence 'I only want this one'). They all show that the elements which belong to the left-branch of the extended projection can be stranded and moved to another position. Further, Corver (1990) points out that this kind of subextraction occurs even in adult lan- guages such as Polish, Russian and Latin. For example, the following example of wh-subextraction in Polish is a well-formed sentence in adult grammar (Corver, 1990: 330): (16) jaki i wykreciles [ti numer]? which/(you) dialed [ti number] ? ('Which number did you dial?') 610 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 He explains this by arguing that nominal arguments in Polish lack the DP-structure, and therefore allow wh-extraction. The subextracted wh-element is assumed to be an extractable adjunct in his analysis, not a head of a functional projection. This kind of semantic detachment by children occurs everywhere: from the sub- ject position, the object position, the adjunct position, and even from a position in an embedded sentence to take the whole matrix sentence in its scope. An example of each is shown in (17): (17) a. Every bear is holding a honeypot. b. A caterpillar is carrying every ladybird. c. There is a baby behind every mummy elephant. d. There is a chair that every cat is sitting on. (Roeper and de Villiers, 1991) As an example, the semantic representation of the sentence (17a) will be as in (18): (18) Every bear is holding a honeypot. LF: FP Spec F' I every F IP DP I' D NP VP V DP D NP J L e bear is holding a honeypot As we can see in the derivation, the quantifier every is detached from its comple- ment bear inside the subject DP every bear, leaving the rest of the DP stranded, and raised to the Spec of FP. The movement of the focused element to the FP is sup- ported by crosslinguistic data, for example, consider Brody's (1990) analysis of Hungarian. Brody assumes that an additional extended projection FP (Focus Phrase) exists and argues that F, F' and FP are present only in sentences that contain a focused element. That is, this projection is optional so that it does not have to be H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591--627 611 present when the sentence does not include any focused category. Further he argues that universal quantifier phrases are <+f> marked inherently, but this inherent <+f> marking for uq-phrases may only be optional. Therefore, when the uq-phrase appears in sentences without focus, it is not <+f> marked because <+f> categories can only appear in sentences with FP's where all <+f> categories must be in FP at LF. The present analysis with children's universal quantification supports these assumptions suggested by Brody. The semantic representation (18) of the sentence (17a) can be interpreted seman- tically as in (19): (19) Semantic interpretation (plus pragmatic restriction) of the LF (18) [FP [Sp~c ~'e R(e), lop 3x bear (x, e), [r 3y (honeypot (y,e), hold (x,y,e))]]]] I II I I I I Restrictor (Picture which the child pays attention to) I I I Restrictor (Bear x is holding individual entity and event) I I Predicate I I Restrictor Predicate (There is a honeypot (Properties of two y which is related to individuals x and y individual entity and event) and event) I I I Predicate 'There is a picture where all minimal events in which either a bear or a honey- pot is a participant are events in which a bear is holding a honeypot.' According to Philip (1995), the notion 'minimal event' is defined as any event denoted by a simple sentence containing no embedded clauses. Thus, for example, an event of a boy riding a pony would be a minimal event, because it may be denoted by the simple sentence A boy is riding a pony, but an event consisting of two subevents, one of a boy riding a pony and the other of a monkey watching on the side, would not constitute a minimal event, since such an event could only be denoted by a complex sentence such as A monkey is watching a boy ride a pony. If we had a boy riding a pony and wearing a cap, this would count as two minimal events, but according to Philip's explanation, a boy wearing a cap would not count as a minimal event here because a minimal event could not be denoted by the com- plex sentence A boy who is wearing a cap is riding a pony. Children would not say 612 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 that 'every boy is riding a pony' was false, when one of the boys was wearing a cap. Philip ignores the internal structure of an individual object, suggesting that the inter- nal structure of an individual event is more salient than that of a singular individual object. As suggested by Annabel Cormack (in p.c.), to make sense of this, we need some sort of 'middle-sized event', defined on analogy with the 'middle sized objects' which feature in prototype theory (cf. e.g. Rosch, 1978). For instance, there could be a hierarchy: (a) 'Something is happening' (b) 'A boy is riding a pony' (c) 'The boys' cap has red spots' where (b) represents a middle sized event; just as 'dog' is a middle sized object in the hierarchy, 'animal-dog-spaniel'. This middle sized event, just like a middle sized object, is somehow salient, and this saliency affects children in their interpretation of quantifiers. 4.2. Pragmatic considerations Turning to the individual data, it is highly plausible that pragmatic factors are at work in this phenomenon. If we have a close look at the individual children's data on all the trials given, as mentioned earlier, more interesting results are found: the very high rates of correct responses are made by the youngest 4 and 5 year old chil- dren and, in contrast, the lowest rates of correct responses are made by the oldest, 7 year old, children. (See the Appendices for the details.) Let us have a look at the dis- tribution of children in each age group, based on the rate of their correct responses. Table 4 Experiments I and II (in parentheses): numbers of English (Korean) children at four levels, based on the rate of their correct responses Age group Rate of correct responses 100-75% 74-50% 49-25% 24-0% 4 1 (6) 4 (4) 4 (2) (3) 5 1 (5) 2 (4) 9 (8) 13 (10) 6 2 (1) 4 (4) 13 (11) 7 1 (2) 5 (2) Total 2 (11) 8 (9) 18 (16) 31 (26) Table 4 shows that 4 English children performed markedly better than the others and, more interestingly, they are the younger children at ages around 4 and 5. If we specify each of them here, child no. 42 made 100% correct responses through all the trials (8 correct responses out of 8 trials) and she is 5 years and 3 months old. Child no. 22 made 86% correct responses (6 out of 7). He made only one error in Control H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 613 Group 4 (the case of left spreading with a transitive verb, e.g. Is a bear holding every honeypot?), and he is only 4 years and 6 months old. Child no. 5 made 73% correct responses (8 out of 11). She made 3 errors in Control Group 3, but performed per- fectly on all the other control groups. She is also 4 years and 8 months old. Child no. 6 made the same 73% correct responses (8 out of 11) and she is 5 years and 5 months old. On the other hand, strikingly, the oldest children performed badly, for example, child no. 41 is 7 years and 3 months old and she got all 4 trials wrong; child no. 47 is 7 years and 1 month old and she made 3 correct responses out of 9 trials; and child no. 53 is 7 years old and he made only 1 correct response out of 9 trials. This interesting result is also mirrored in the Korean children's performance, as shown in the parentheses of Table 4. The eleven high scorers over 75% are all 4 or 5 year old children, and all the oldest 6 and 7 year old children made low percent- ages of correct responses, less than 50%, as shown in the table. To specify their results individually, child no. 42 made 100% correct responses, 4 out of 4, and she is only 4 years and 4 months old, and the other five 4 year old children got 1 or 2 answers wrong, leading the scores up to around 85% correct responses. Child no. 22 also made 100% correct responses, 11 out of 11, and he is just 5 years old, and the other three 5 year old children made 1 or 2 errors out of the total trials, leading to the scores up to around 85% correct responses. That is, the youngest 11 children per- formed nearly perfectly in the Korean experiment, just as in the English experiment. Here again, the oldest four 7 year old children performed badly: child no. 12 got all the responses wrong, 0 out of 6 (0%); child no. 20 got all 9 trials wrong; child no. 4 got 3 right out of 10 (30%); and child no. 8 got 3 right out of 11 (27%). This distribution of the numbers of children based on the rate of correct responses between each age group, represented in Table 4, shows the classic pattern of the U- shaped developmental curve, which has been demonstrated as a general phenomenon in acquisition (or in maturation) in the relevant literature on child development. This finding is reminiscent, for example, of Karmiloff-Smith's (1992) Representational Redescription Hypothesis. A typical example of this hypothesis is provided by her results for the behaviour of young children, aged from 4 to 9, attempting to balance blocks of different shapes and sizes on a metal support. In her experiments some blocks balanced at their geometric centre; others, which looked identical, had been f'llled with lead at one end and so balanced off-centre, and yet others had a weight visibly glued at one end so that they balanced off-centre as well. The youngest 4- year-olds performed far more successfully than 6- or 7-year-olds in the experiments. While it is not obvious that her explanation of this phenomenon (in terms of the tran- sition from an implicit to an explicit form of representation) generalizes to the syn- tactic domain (for discussion, see Smith, 1994), some version of her account may well be relevant in the current 'mixed' domain where both visual and linguistic stim- uli have to be integrated. An interesting altemative interpretation of this experimental result can be derived from Grimshaw and Rosen's (1990) argument that knowing a linguistic rule and obeying it have to be distinguished. They challenge the position of previous researchers concerning the acquisition of binding, which holds that young children 614 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 do not have knowledge of Principle B of the binding theory (cf. Lust, 1986; Wexler and Chien, 1985). Through their own experiment on Principle B and C violations, they demonstrate that children know all aspects of Binding Principle B, the corefer- ence aspects and its variable-binding aspects, that is, children are innately endowed with the knowledge, as also reviewed and argued by Grodzinsky and Reinhart (1993), and they argue that experimental results indicating that children do not know the coreference aspects of the standard binding theory are due to performance factors that mask this knowledge. They comment that "children need not obey the binding theory, in order to demonstrate knowledge of the binding theory" (Grimshaw and Rosen, 1990: 189). Where children's performance differentiates between grammatical and ungrammatical cases, this indicates that they know the rule in question. Their account is compatible with the cun'ent experimental f'mdings in which children showed signif- icantly different performance between the contexts which do match to target test sen- tences (yielding 'yes' as their right answer) and those which do not match to them (yielding 'no' as their right answer). Their performance differentiates between the for- mer and the latter. Further, the youngest children, around the age of 4, and the younger 5 year olds, performed significantly better than the older children. From these results, it can be assumed that children as young as 4 years old have appropriate knowledge of quantification. However, the existence of spreading errors at the ages of 4 and 5 (the rest of the children in the age groups 4 and 5, that is, 30 children except the 4 superior children in Experiment I and 31 children except the 11 superior children in Experiment II) indicates that the relevant syntactic rules have not been completely mastered yet at this stage. Depending on individual children's ability, the error rate can vary. They more or less know the grammatical function of quantifiers as modifiers to quantify the noun phrase, and most of them are in the stage of learning (or fixing) the relevant grammatical knowledge, e.g. quantifiers as functional heads and the Left- Branch Condition, as mentioned earlier. But in addition, pragmatic factors seem to be operating here. I argue that aspects of the acquisition of quantification, just like the coreference aspects of Principle B, involve pragmatic considerations. It has been reported that pragmatic effects first appear late in acquisition, later than syntactic knowledge. For example, Grodzinsky and Reinhart (1993) report that they appear around the age of 6. On this view, children can make mistakes on cer- tain tasks, even though they have the relevant grammatical knowledge, because the mistakes are due to pragmatic factors. From the evidence of the current experiments, where some children as young as 4 years old performed perfectly in all different con- trol groups, it can be assumed that children at the age of 4 can have grammatical knowledge of quantification, say, the status of a quantifier as a functional head of DP and the Left-Branch Condition. In contrast, it can be assumed that the experimental results leading to the poor scores on the tasks, especially by the older 6 and 7 year old children, and also the fact that they gave many more 'no' responses, are to be attributed to pragmatic factors. On this view, the errors made by younger children and the errors made by older children have to derive from different sources. The for- mer are attributable to a deficiency of grammatical knowledge, whereas the latter are due to the interference of pragmatic factors, even though relevant grammatical knowledge is available. H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 615 Here I argue that the pragmatic factors are a function of the central systems. On the basis of their interpretation of the stimulus pictures, children take the quantifier to be salient, introducing new information. As a result they overgeneralise its scope to include objects which, while not mentioned, are depicted. As for the phenomenon of quantifier spreading, in the process of integrating conceptual representations and representations produced by the language faculty, pragmatic (cognitive) influence is stronger than syntactic influence; that is, conceptual factors are acting more strongly than grammatical factors. On this view, it is hypothesised that learning in at least three domains is needed for children's development: first, they need to acquire syn- tactic knowledge; second, they need to master the pragmatic considerations; and finally, they need to learn that pragmatics cannot overrule syntax. The majority of children involved in the current experiments, at the ages of 6 and 7, are in the sec- ond phase in which they are struggling with pragmatic misunderstanding. I assume that from the evidence of the current experimental data, children at the age of 4 (at latest 5) have the syntactic knowledge of quantification, but this knowledge is masked by the emergence of pragmatic consideration around the age of 6. Concep- tual representations predominate over grammatical knowledge, leading to the spread- ing errors. Gradually, as soon as they learn the third phase, when their grammatical knowledge becomes sufficiently established to get rid of the overruling pragmatic facts, the phenomenon of quantifier spreading would disappear. The current experi- ments show that this mastery has not been achieved by 7 years old. A natural ques- tion is whether this stage is mastered abruptly at a certain age or gradually over a longer period. I leave this issue for future research, covering age groups older than 7. 4.3. A synthesis Therefore, I argue that the phenomenon of quantifier spreading is neither exclu- sively cognitive nor exclusively linguistic, but is dependent on contributions from the language faculty and from the central system of the child's mind in the sense of Fodor (1983). That is, a non-linguistic cognitive factor is clearly operative in this phenomenon, and conceptual representations caused by this cognitive factor interact closely with the linguistic representations computed by the language faculty. Then the difference between children's and adults' conceptual representations with uni- versal quantification is attributed to the interplay between their cognitive abilities and their linguistic abilities as these mature. The visual input, the picture, plays a predominant role in children's comprehen- sion. They are preoccupied with the individual entities available in the picture and find specific items from it, matching one to one between agents and objects, when they listen to the test sentence. The quantifier, for example, every, in the test sen- tence is salient enough to provide them with enough information in a mismatching situation to make them answer in the negative without thinking further. Children interpret the salient word every as covering each individual object available in the picture. In their conceptual representation the domain of quantification might be the set of objects (or arguments) available in both visual and auditory inputs. Each of 616 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 those entities in the picture seems to be treated by the children as having to be put into some sort of thematic relation with another. Each scene (or event) of a picture is a restrictor of the universal quantifier. This is supported by the children's sponta- neous reaction to the picture. The children involved in the present experiments gen- erally enumerate the individual entities one by one. For example, to the question What can you see here?, they normally answer "a bear, a honeypot, and a piglet, three bears are holding a honeypot, (and pointing to each item and repeating) this bear is holding a honeypot, this bear is holding a honeypot and this bear is holding a honeypot, but this honeypot is not, nobody is holding this honeypot, this piglet is going to get it because he hasn't got it", etc. This enumeration of each individual entity by children is also found in their responses to the second input, the test ques- tion, for example Is every bear holding a honeypot?. After their answers 'yes' or 'no' (they were asked to answer 'yes' or 'no' in the introduction of the experiment), children normally enumerate each item again, for example, "this bear, this bear, and this bear are holding a honeypot, but this honeypot is left out and a piglet too". Some children preferred to answer without the definite response of 'yes' or 'no', just say- ing "only three, three bears are holding a honeypot and one honeypot has nobody and a piglet has nothing". When they were asked to answer with 'yes' or 'no', they responded with 'yes, but' and enumerated the items again. From their spontaneous reaction to the picture I got the strong impression of the existence of the exhaustive representation suggested by Brooks and Braine (1996) in children's conceptual rep- resentation. They assign an exhaustive representation to a sentence with a universal quantifier so that the quantifier covers all the entities available in its scope in their conceptual representation. We have seen that the pictures which were used for the visual input, and the lex- ical item, the quantifier, which was one of the items of the auditory input, both made significant impacts on the phenomenon of quantifier spreading. Pictures, especially odd entities in the picture, were salient to children's imagination so that the pictures play a predominant role over the auditory input. Individual entities in the picture are given a conceptual representation prior to the auditory input. On the other hand, the presence of the quantifier from the linguistic (auditory) input is also salient to chil- dren because of its intrinsic property. Here it has to be noted that the two inputs, that is, pictures and test sentences, have to be treated separately, because pictures induce the individual's central cognitive processing via the visual system, whereas test sen- tences trigger a prior linguistic analysis. In other words, the interpretation of the pic- tures has to be analysed by reference to cognitive processing, whereas the interpre- tation of the test sentences has to be analysed first by reference to linguistic processing. The difference between children and adults with regard to universal quantification can be attributed to the adults' ability to deal with the mixture of cognitive and lin- guistic variables. Even though children and adults have access to the same cognitive mechanisms, and further, the quantifier might be salient to both of them because of its intrinsic property (i.e. the quantifier as focused element), their interpretation could be different, depending on their grammatical knowledge and their mastery of the principle that cognitive considerations cannot overrule grammatical knowledge. H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591--627 617 That is, the interpretation of quantification might be effected through close interac- tion between the conceptual representation and the language faculty. I here propose a map of mental comprehension which shows the competition between different ver- sions of each individual language of thought and their integration, and further their close intercommunication with the language faculty, as depicted by the arrows in Fig. 1. Fodorian modules Vision Olfaction Audition ... etc. \/ Conceptual representations Language faculty CENTRAL SYSTEM L N/ \/ Decoding into LOTv Decoding .into LOTA I Integration LOTA OTv '~ epre- / LOT ( Repre- L rotation (neutral) sentation ,,$ 1, $ "'$ KNOWLEDGE BASE Conceptual ~ Conceptual Structure Lexicon ~ :~q not resolved UG S-structure LF +q Lexicon --q ~'x PF Fig. 1. A map of mental comprehension. LOTv stands for a language of thought for the visual input. LOTA stands for a language of thought for the auditory input input. Here I assume an analysis of the central system, comparable to that proposed by Smith and Tsimpli (1995), where LOTv is that variety of the language of thought that arises from transduction from the visuo-spatial system and LOTA is that variety of the language of thought that arises from the language system, that is, assuming that the language of thought in the mind is not unitary. As an example, the vision module inputs the image of the picture into the language of thought to give a LOT v representation, and similarly, the audition (language) module inputs the natural lan- guage into the other language of thought to give a LOTA representation. That is, the 618 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 vision and audition modules are input systems in the sense of Fodor (1983). The two representations, LOT v and LOT A, which might be viewed as intermediate transduc- tions, are integrated into a single unitary interpretation where the two LOTs become neutral and share a common format. When a child looks at the picture which depicts the situation where there are three bears holding a honeypot each, with one honeypot left out and a piglet alone; each individual concept, such as [bear], 7 [bear], [bear], [honeypot], [piglet], and also the relationship of a bear and a honeypot, that is, the event ['x holding y': x = bear; y = honeypot], are decoded to give a representation in the language of thought. That is, in this LOTv representation, each referential concept and the event in which the cor- responding images are involved are present. The second message, that is, the audi- tory linguistic input, (here Is every bear holding a honeypot?), is decoded into a sep- arate version of the language of thought to give a representation LOTA, where it is probably the case that the vocabularies of the two LOT representations are not iden- tical. When the verbal message is decoded, the items such as 'bear', 'honeypot' and the event ['x holding y': x = bear; y = honeypot] are already present in the child's LOT representation, hence constitute old information. In consequence the word every, which has no obvious visual equivalent, is salient for the child. Here, I take 'salient' to mean 'what is more relevant than some other stimulus in the same con- text', where relevance is in turn defined in terms of contextual effects and process- ing effort, in the sense of Relevance Theory (Sperber and Wilson, 1986, 1995). Accordingly, the quantifier every plays a predominant role in the child's interpreta- tion. In other words, in the LOTA representation, the items such as 'bear', 'honeypot' and the event ['x holding y': x = bear; y = honeypot] appear as old information, which overlaps with that in the LOTv representation, whereas the quantifier every appears as new information which is partially correlated with the old information 'bear', 'honeypot', and the event ['x holding y': x = bear; y = honeypot]. These two representations are integrated into a single interpretation. In the process of interpretation, the left-hand-side LOTv representation has precedence over the right- hand-side representation, LOTA, because the visual input is more salient to the child than the auditory input (the child is still looking at the picture while he/she listens to the taped question). The LOTv representation interferes with the child's construction of an LOTA representation. The LOTA representation is structurally 'dissolved' so that the elements are no longer in a deterministic structural configuration, i.e. every is detached from (e.g.) 'bear' and can float free and reattach to any (or every) constituent. The child tries to connect the salient word every to all individual objects present in his LOT representation, including the third element 'piglet' as well which is not men- tioned in the test question, and checks whether these objects are involved in the target event [x holding y]. If they are not, he or she responds in the negative. In other words, the child misconstrues the fact that the experimenter's intention is precisely to draw his/her attention to the salient word every and in the process of interpretation overgen- eralizes its scope to cover all the items represented in his/her language of thought. 7 The bracket [ ] indicates that the items inside it represent concepts or images, distinguishing those from the natural language forms such as 'bear', 'honeypot' or 'piglet'. H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 619 As indicated by the arrows in Fig. 1, where the relation between conceptual struc- ture and linguistic structure is bidirectional, the conceptual representations intercom- municate closely with the language faculty. The former might be affected by the rel- evant rules of the latter. Then, the difference between children and adults with regard to universal quantification can be caused by their mastery of the relevant grammati- cal knowledge, i.e. the language faculty, and at the same time by their mastery of the interplay between those two systems, the conceptual representation and the language faculty. Even though children and adults have access to the same cognitive mecha- nisms and further both of them can be affected by the salience of the picture and the quantifier, adults who are equipped with full grammatical knowledge of the relevant rules and principles of the language and also have logical reasoning to exclude pos- sible (but irrelevant) pragmatic considerations are not affected by this salience. For them, their grammatical knowledge is precise enough to determine one particular (correct) interpretation. On the other hand, children's failure to determine a seman- tic restriction on the domain of quantification can be attributed to both their lack of the relevant grammatical knowledge and the predominance of the conceptual repre- sentations over the grammatical knowledge. To compare the two systems, the 'conceptual lexicon' includes encyclopaedic information associated with each item of vocabulary, i.e. it contains a variety of con- cepts for each lexical item in the UG lexicon. These concepts are integrated into a 'conceptual structure', forming a thematically (and logically) related configurational structure with specification of predication - a subject-predicate relation, comple- mentation - a head-complement relation, and scope assignment of the operators such as tense, plurals, focus, adverbs, wh-words and quantifiers. Their relation does not need to be syntactically hierarchical but can be linearly ordered, based on the the- matic function of each item. This structure maps onto linguistic structure, exploiting the projection of lexical categories such as V, N, P, and A and their corresponding phrasal categories: VP/IP, NP/DP, PP and AP/DegP. Features such as tense, focus and plurality and all 'functional' information are drawn from the UG lexicon and integrated with the conceptual structure. Conceptual structure may or may not include quantificational information, (indicated by +q and -q in Fig. 1) thereby cor- responding to the linguistic levels of representation LF and S-structure respectively (note that I am presupposing a 'pre-Minimalist' linguistic theory with at least one level of syntactic representation). 8 The mapping between items of conceptual repre- sentation and those of the language faculty is carried out at the interface. The con- ceptual and the linguistic representations mirror each other, but the contents of the two representations are not always identical. The contents of the former depend on an individual's knowledge: for example, a person who can deal with several lan- guages which have different properties, e.g. plural systems, parameter settings for word order, the presence or absence of arguments in the structure, etc., may have multi-dimensional entries in his or her conceptual system. Further, the conceptual structure and the linguistic structure are both configurational, but the former includes 8 I am not committed to any particular interpretation of S-structure, but I need representations with and without quantificational specification. 620 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 only thematic and scope relations, as mentioned above, whereas the latter ranges over lexical (V,N,P,A) and phrasal categories (VP,NP,PP,AP). Against the two different accounts presented in Section 2, I here argue that the phenomenon of quantifier spreading has to be explained in both cognitive and lin- guistic terms, as long as non-linguistic inputs such as pictures are used for visual input and test sentences for linguistic input. Most previous researchers used the same kind of picture verification task, but they ignored the effects arising from the visual input, and failed to integrate non-linguistic and linguistic aspects to explain the phe- nomenon. If they wish to explain the phenomenon from a purely linguistic point of view, the experimental methodology has to be changed. They should not use pictures as the input, rather, the stimulus should be administered to individuals linguistically by telling them the story of the scene, not by depicting it with pictures, ff the same kind of spreading error is still observed, then, it can be argued that this spreading phenomenon is exclusively linguistic. As long as pictures are used as visual inputs and children show concern about an unmentioned but pictured object, as observed in the current experiments, the phenomenon has to be analysed from both cognitive and linguistic points of view. Interestingly, focusing on this fact, Crain et al. (1996), as introduced earlier, used a different methodology, the real acting toy performance, to deliver the story, and found that the children involved in their experiment did not make errors. On the basis of the result, they argued that the methodology used in the previous research was not appropriate and that spreading errors disappeared when an appropriate methodology was used in the experiment. However, the high rates of correct responses by the children in their experiment could be accounted for not only because the children who gave the correct answers could recognize the property (or nature) of the quantifiers, but because they had a clear visual image which could pre- dominate over the auditory input. They also used visual input, but they used toy fig- ures performing actions in real time instead of pictures. The visual input of real actions which clearly described what happened in the story was definite enough for the children to grasp the correct content of the story. The 'real acting' stimulus could provide a more powerful effect than looking-at-pictures to enable children to achieve the correct interpretation for the target test question, because the former provides children with overt clues while the latter depends on the individual's imagination. Most previous research since Piaget, including the present one, has been interested in the different interpretation by children from adults about relevant contexts, for example, the extra object condition, in which there is no symmetrical one-to-one cor- respondence between agents and objects. That is, my original interest in this subject started from the different interpretation by children from adults of this static image such as pictures and how it affects their interpretation of quantifiers. In this respect, Crain et al.'s real time toy acting performance has a different motivation so that their methodology is not relevant here. My mixed (linguistic and non-linguistic) account predicts that individual enti- ties from the visual input and the linguistic input are competing with each other to give different LOT representations, and in this process the saliency of both visual entities and the quantifier causes spreading errors. The errors are affected by the H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 621 interactive operation between the conceptual structure and the language faculty. When the relevant grammatical knowledge is acquired and becomes strong enough to get rid of irrelevant conceptual representations, the spreading error should dis- appear. On this account, the non-linguistic (cognitive) factors, for example, the influence of pictures, and linguistic factors, for example, the intrinsic property of a quantifier or the syntactic position of a quantifier, are treated as equally impor- tant in causing the error. This mixed account predicts that children may be con- cerned about the unmentioned but pictured object, which affects their interpreta- tion of universal quantification. It also predicts that the degree of error rates in children's interpretation of quantifiers might be different according to the different syntactic positions or structures of quantifiers, because their interpretations are affected by the close interaction between the conceptual representations and the language faculty. 5. Conclusion Throughout the parallel experiments on English and Korean four-to-seven year old children, we have seen that quantifier spreading is a general phenomenon which is found in a certain young age group crosslinguistically, perhaps universally. The occurrence of these errors has been analysed in two different ways, linguistically and cognitively. The experimental data which indicate that children are sensitive to posi- tional and also structural cues of the syntax of quantifiers support a linguistic inter- pretation of the phenomenon. On the other hand, the results from individual chil- dren's data which show different error rates in the performance of four different age groups lead us to consider the function of pragmatic (cognitive) factors in this phe- nomenon. The difference between children and adults in their interpretation of quantifiers is claimed to be due to adults' mastery of both logical thinking and of the relevant grammatical knowledge. It is therefore assumed that spreading errors by children are attributed in part to their lack of the relevant grammatical knowledge, and in part to the interference of pragmatic considerations which causes some confusion in the use of their existing grammatical knowledge. Appendices A: Experiments I (English) and H (Korean) - Individual children's data on four different groups of test sentences Rows represent the numbers of each child's correct responses out of the total trials shown in brackets on each group, and columns distinguish each different group of test sentences: Group 1: RT: right spreading/transitive Group 2: RINT: right spreading/intransitive Group 3: LT: left spreading/transitive Group 4: LINT: left spreading/intransitive 622 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591--627 No significant differences were found between the three quantifiers every (modun), each (kakkak-uy) and all (modun NP-tul) in both experiments, and further between the contexts which yield the positive response 'yes' as their right answer so that the variations are col- lapsed here to arrive at the main concern of the study. For example, Column 1 represents the number of individual children's correct responses out of the total oppotunities given, which are shown in bracket, in the case of the [every(modun)/each(kakkak-uy)/all(modun NP-tul) -a noun] type in Contexts 1 and 2. Table A~ Experiment I: 59 English children Child 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 Group 1 (RT) 2 (3) 2 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 0 (2) None None None 2 (4) 1 (4) l (4) 1 (4) 0 (1) 0 (1) 1 (2) 0 (2) 1 (3) 2(2) 0 (2) o (2) o (1) 0 (1) 1 (3) 2 (3) 2 (RINT) 1 (2) 0 (2) o (2) 0 (2) ~(3) 2 (3) 2 (3) o (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 0 (3) o (1) 3 (LT) 1 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 2 (5) 3 (5) 0 (5) 0 (5) 0 (1) 0 (1) o (1) 1 (2) 4 (LINT) 1 (2) o (2) o (2) o (2) (1) (1) (2) (2) (2) (3) (3) Total 7 (10) 3 (10) 2 (10) 2 (10) 8 (11) 8 (11) 4 (11) 0 (11) 2 (6) 1 (6) 0 (6) 6 (10) 2 (10) 0 (1) 2 (3) 0 (3) 0 (1) 1 (2) 1 (2) 0 (2) 0 (1) 0 (1) 0 (1) 0 (2) 0 (2) 1 (2) 1 (3) 0 (3) 0 (3) 0 (4) 0 (4) (2) (2) (5) (5) (5) (3) (3) (2) (2) (2) (4) (4) (4) (3) (3) (3) (1) (4) (4) (4) (3) (3) 0 (3) 0 (3) 1 (2) 1 (2) 0 (2) 1 (3) 0 (3) 0 (3) 0 (1) 0 (1) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 1 (3) 0 (3) 0 (3) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (1) o (1) 2 3 3 1 2 7 2 3 6 3 1 4 1 0 3 3 2 1 3 5 3 1 1 2 2 (10) (10) (9) (9) (9) (11) (11) (11) (7) (7) (7) (10) (10) (lO) (8) (8) (8) (8) (8) (8) (10) (10) (10) (10) (lOi Age 4;8 5;3 6;O 7;3 4;8 5;5 5;9 6;7 5;2 5;8 7;2 4;6 5;9 5;9 6;7 4;8 5;8 7;1 4;8 6;1 6;6 4;6 5;8 6;2 4;4 5;8 6;5 4;8 5;6 6;8 5;2 5;9 6;7 4;4 5;8 6;8 5;3 6;2 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 Table A1 (continued) Experiment I: 59 English children 623 2hild 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 total ]Group 11 (RT) 0 (2) o (2) 2 (RINT) None None None 3 (LT) 1 (2) 0 (2) 4 (LINT) None None None i Total 1 (4) o (4) o (4) 8(8) (2) (2) (1) (2) (2) (2) (3) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (1) 0 (3) 0 0 (3) 0 0 (4) 0 2 (4) 1 1 (4) 0 0 (2) 1 0 (2) 1 0 (2) 0 0 (2) 0 0 (2) 0 o (2) o 1 (4) 0 (1) 1 (8) (1) 1 (8) (2) 0 (9) (2) 5 (9) (2) 3 (9) (3) 3 (9) (3) 2 (9) (3) 1 (9) (2) 4 (9) (2) 3 (9) (2) 1 (9) (1) 1 (8) 1 (2) o (2) None None None 56(115) 49% 0 (1) o (1) 0 (1) 0 (l) 31(110) 28% 2 (4) 0 (4) 0 (1) 0 (1) 0 (1) 46(169) 27% t (1) i o (1) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 5(110) 14% 5 (8) 0 (8) 0 (4) 0 (4) 0 (4) 148(504) 29% Age 5;3 6;8 7;3 5;3 5;8 6;2 5;1 6;5 7;1 5;3 6;1 6;3 5;2 6;3 7;0 5;1 5;8 6;l 5;3 5;6 6;9 * Rows: Child; Columns: Control group (test sentences); Figures: Correct responses (out of total tri- als given); Shaded columns in the table show the 100% correst responses achieved. Table A 2 Numbers of children who made all their responses right to each control group (in the first row); num- bers of children who made all their responses wrong (in the second row); and numbers of children who made mixed responses, that is, sometimes wrong and sometimes right (in the third row) Responses Group Total 1 2 3 4 (1,2,3) (20,21,22) (4,5,6) (23,24,25) All fight 16 l0 6 5 1 All wrong 15 31 30 41 10 Mixed 22 15 23 10 48 624 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 Table A 3 Experiment II: 62 Korean Children Child Group I(RT) 2(RINT 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 2 (3) 1 (3) 2 (3) 0 (2) 1 (2) None None None None 3 (4) 3 (4) 1 (4) 0 (1) i o O) o (2) 1 (2) 1 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (3) 0 (3) 0 (3) 0 (1) o (1) o (1) 0 (1) 0 (3) 1 (3) 2 (3) o (3) 1 (3) 3 (5) 0 (5) 0 (1) 0 (1) 0 (1) 1 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 3 (5) i (5) 0 (5) 0 (5) 1 (3) 3(LT) 1 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (1) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 2 (3) 0 (3) 0 (3) 1 (2) 0 (2) 1 (2) o (2) 0 (3) 0 (1) 0 (1) 2 (3) 0 (3) 0 (1) 0 (1) 1 (2) 0 (2) 1 (3) 0 (3) 2 (3) 3 (4) 1 (4) 0 (4) None None None 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 2 (3) 1 (3) 0 (1) 1 (4) 0 (4) o (4) 2 (3) o (3) 0 (3) 1 (2) 2 (2) o (3) 1 (3) o (3) 0 (3) 0 (3) o (2) 1 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 1 (1) o (1) 0 (1) None None None 0 (1) 0 (1) 0 (1) Total 4(LINT) 6 (10) 5 (10) 1 (10) 3 (10) 9 (11) 2 (11) 0 (6) 0 (6) 0 (6) 7 (lO) 3 (10) 1 (10) 6 (9) 1 (9) 3 (9) o (9) 1 (11) 6 (11) 6 (7) 2 (7) 2 (7) 8 (10) 5 (lO) 2 (8) 1 (8) 4 (8) 7 (8) 0 (8) 3 (10) 1 (10) 3 (10) 8 (10) 3 (10) 2 (10) 3 (4) 2 (4) 1 (8) 2 (8) 1 (8) Age 4;6 5;4 5;7 7;0 4;4 5;5 6;0 7;6 4;6 5;4 5;5 7;0 4;3 5;1 6;0 6;8 4;8 5;4 5;6 7;2 4;8 5;0 5;8 4;5 5;5 5;7 4;6 5;3 6;0 4;5 5;7 6;1 4;8 5;3 6;6 4;2 6;0 6;0 5;4 6;0 6;7 4;4 5;3 6;3 5;3 5;8 6;4 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591--627 Table A3 (continued) Experiment II: 62 Korean Children 625 2hild 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 rotal Group I(RT) o (1) o (2) None None 1 1 (2/ 1 (2) 2(RINT o (2) None 0 (2) 0 (3) 1 (3) Total 3(LT) 4(LINT) 0 (9) 0 (3) 3 (9) 3 (9) 4 (9) 1 (9) 4 (9) 1 (9) 1 (5) 1 (8) 5 (8) 2 (8) 0 (4) 0 (4) 0 (4) 189(519) 36% 1 (2) 3 (3) 1 (3) 1 (3) 0 (2) 0 (2) None None None 73(117) 62% o (2) 1 (2) 0 (2) None 0 (1) o (1) o (1) o (1) 0 (1) 39(114) 34% 0 (4) 0 (3) 0 (4) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) o (2) 0 (2) o (1) 1 (4) 2 (4) o (1) o (1) 0 (1) 0 (3) 0 (2) 0 (2) o (1) 0 (1) 0 (1) 0 (2) 0 (2) 0 (2) 25(112) 22% 52(176) 30% Age 4;4 5;1 5;7 5;3 5;7 6;3 4;6 5;4 6;6 4;7 5;3 6;7 5;O 5;8 6;8 * Rows: Child; Columns: Control group (test sentences); Figures: Correct responses (out of total tri- als given); Shaded columns in the table show the 100% correst responses achieved. Table A4 Numbers of children who made all their responses right to each control group (in the first row); num- bers of children who made all their responses wrong (in the second row); and numbers of children who made mixed responses, that is, sometimes wrong and sometimes right (in the third row) Responses Group Total 1 2 3 4 (1,2,3) (20,21,22) (4,5,6) (23,24,25) All fight 26 13 9 8 5 AUwrong 13 30 30 41 11 Mixed 15 14 23 9 46 References Abney, S., 1987. The English noun phrase in its sentential aspect. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT. Boster, C. T. and S. Crain, 1993. On children's understanding of every and or. In: Conference Proceed- ings: Early Cognition and the Transition to Language. Austin, TX: University of Texas at Austin. Brody, M., 1990. Some remarks on the focus field in Hungarian. UCL Working Papers 2, 201-225. Brooks, P. and M. Braine, 1996. What do children know about the universal quantifiers all and each? Cognition 60, 235-268. 626 H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591--627 Carston, R., 1988. Language and cognition. In: F. Newmeyer (ed.), Linguistics: The Cambridge survey, vol. 3, 38-68. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Chomsky, N., 1986. Knowledge of language: Its nature, origin and use. New York: Praeger. Chomsky, N., 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Corver, N.F.M., 1990. The syntax of left-branch extractions. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Tilburg. Crain, S., R. Thornton, C. Boster, L. Conway, D. Lillo-Martin and E. Woodams, 1996. Quantification without qualification. Language Acquisition 5(2), 83-153. Doetjes, J., A. Neeleman and H. van de Koot, 1998. Degree expressions and the autonomy of syntax. UCL Working Papers 10, 323-367. Donaldson, M., 1978. Children's Minds. Fontana Press. Donaldson, M. and P. Lloyd, 1974. Sentences and situations: Childrens judgments of match and mis- match. In: F. Bresson (ed.), Current problems in psycholinguistics. Paris: Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. Drozd, K., 1998. Children's weak interpretations of universally quantified questions. In: M. Bowerman and S. Levinson (eds.), Conceptual development and language acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Drozd, K. and W. Philip, 1992. Event Quantification in Preschoolers' Comprehension of Negation. In: E. Clark (ed.), Child Language Research Forum, Vol. 24. Stanford, CA: CLRF. Fodor, J., 1983. The modularity of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Fodor, J., 1992. A theory of the child's theory of mind. Cognition 44, 283-296. Freeman, N.H., C.G. Sinha, and J.A. Stedmon, 1982. All the cars-which cars? from word meaning to discourse analysis. In: M. Beveridge (eds.), Children Thinking Through Language. London: Edward Arnold. Freeman, N. and J. Stedmon, 1986. How children deal with natural language quantification. In: I. Kurez, G.W. Shugar and J.H. Danks (eds.), Knowledge and language. North-Holland: Elsevier. Giusti, G., 1991. The categorial status of quantified nominals. Linguistische Berichte 136, 438-452. Giusti, G., 1997. The categorial status of determiners. In: L. Haegeman (ed.), The new comparative syn- tax, 95-123. London: Longman. Grimshaw, J. and S.T. Rosen, 1990. Knowledge and obedience: The developmental status of the Bind- ing Theory. Linguistic Inquiry 21-22, 187-222. Grodzinsky, Y. and T. Reinhart, 1993. The innateness of binding and coreference. Linguistic Inquiry 24(1): 69-101. Guilfoyle, E. and M. Noonan, 1988. Functional categories and language acquisition. Paper presented at the 13th Annual Boston University Conference on Language Acquisition, Boston, 13 October. Heim, I., 1982. The semantics of definite and indefinite NPs. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Massa- chusetts, Amherst. Higginbotham, J., 1995. Sense and syntax. An inaugural lecture, The University of Oxford. Oxford: Clarendon Press. Hoekstra, T. and P. Jordens, 1994. From adjunct to head. In: T. Hoekstra and B.D. Schwartz (eds.), Lan- guage acquisition (Studies in generative grammar), 119-149. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Huang, J.C.-T., 1982. Logical relations in Chinese and the theory of grammar. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT. Inhelder, B. and J. Piaget, J., 1958. The growth of logical thinking from childhood to adolescence. New York, NY: Basic Books. Inhelder, B. and J. Piaget, 1964. The early growth of logic in the child. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Ioup, G., 1975. Some universals for quantifier scope. Syntax and Semantics 4, 37-58. Karmiloff-Smith, A., 1992. Beyond modularity: A developmental perspective on cognitive science. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Kampen, N.J. van, 1997. First steps in wh-movement. Ph.D. dissertation, Utrecht University. Kang, H.-K., 1999. Left-branch elements: Adjuncts vs. heads. In: S.O. Lee and C.J. Kwon (eds.), Onul- uy munbup, uri-lul ediro (a Festschrift for Hong-Bae Lee), 73-90. Seoul: Hanshin. Kang, H.-K., 2000. Aspects of the acquisition of quantification: Experimental studies of English and Korean children. Ph.D. thesis, University College London. H.-K. Kang / Lingua 111 (2001) 591-627 627 Lee, T., 1991. Linearity as a scope principle for Chinese: The evidence from first language acquisition. In: D. Napoli and J. Kegl (eds.), Bridges between psychology and linguistics. Hillsdale, NJ: Erl- baum. Lewis, D., 1975. Adverbs of quantification. In: E. Keenan (ed.), Formal semantics of natural language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lust, B. (ed.), 1986. Studies in the acquisition of anaphora, vol. 1. Dordrecht: Reidel. Maxfield, T. and B. Plunkett (eds.), 1991. Papers in the acquisition of WH (University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers). GLSA, Amherst. May, R., 1977. The grammar of quantification. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT. Philip, W., 1991. Quantification over events in early universal quantification. Paper presented at the 16th Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development, Boston, MA. Philip, W., 1992. Event quantification and the symmelrical interpretation of universal quantifiers in child language. In: K. von Fintel and H. Rullman (Eds.), University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers in Linguistics: Semantics Issues. Linguistics Departmet, UMASS, Amherst, MA: Graduate Linguistics Students Association. Philip, W., 1995. Event Quantification in the Acquisition of Universal Quantification. Doctoral Disser- tation, University of Massachusetts at Amherst. Amherst, Mass.: GLSA. Philip, W., 1996. Symmetrical Interpretation and Scope Ambiguity in the Acquisition of Quantification in Dutch. In C. Koster & F. Wijnen (eds.), Proceedings of Groningen Assembly in Language Acqui- sition, 293-302. The Hague: CIP-GEGEVENS KONINKLIJKE BIBLIOTHEEK. Philip, W. and S. Aurelio, 1991. Quantifier Spreading: Pilot study of preschoolers' every. In: Maxfield and Plunker (eds.), University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers: Papers in the Acquisition of WH, 267-282. Amherst: GLSA. Philip, W. and M. Takahashi, 1991. Quantifier Spreading in the acquisition of every. In: T. Maxfield and B. Plunkett (eds.), University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers: Papers in the Acquisition of WH, 283-301. Amherst: GLSA. Philip, W. and M. Verrips, 1994. Dutch Preschoolers' Elke. Paper presented at the 19th Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development, Boston. Radford, A., 1990. Syntactic theory and the acquisition of English syntax. Oxford: Blackwell. Roeper, T. and E. Matthei, 1974. On the acquisition of all and some. Proceedings of the Stanford Child Language Conference. Roeper, T. and J. de Villiers, 1991. The emergence of bound variable structures. In: T. Maxfield and B. Plunkett (eds.), .), Papers in the acquisition of WH (University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers), 225-265. Amherst: GLSA.. Rosch, E., 1978. Principles of categorization. In: E. Rosch and B. Lloyd (eds.), Cognition and catego- rization, 27-48. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Ross, J.R., 1967. Constraints on variables in syntax. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT. Smith, N.V., 1994. Review of Karmiloff-Smith (1992). European Journal of Disorders of Communica- tion 29, 95-105. Smith, N.V. and I.-M. Tsimpli, 1995. The mind of a savant: Language learning and modularity. Oxford: BlackweU. Sperber, D. and D. Wilson, 1986 (1995). Relevance: Communication and cognition. Oxford: Blackwell. de Swart, H., 1991. Adverbs of quantification: A generalized quantifier approach. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Groningen. Tsimpli, I.-M., 1996. The prefunctional stage of language acquisition. New York: Garland. Tsimpli, I.-M. and N.V. Smith, 1998. Modules and quasi-modules: Language and theory of mind in a polyglot savant. Journal of Individual Differences 10, 193-215. Vendler, Z., 1967. Linguistics in philosophy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. Wason, P., 1965. The contexts of plausible denial. Journal of Verbal Behavior and Verbal Learning 4, 7-11. Wexler, K. and Y.-C. Chien, 1985. The development of lexical anaphors and pronouns. Papers and Reports on Child Language Development 24. Stanford, CA: Stanford University. 