ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 511-515 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Book review Aaron Halpem, On the placement and morphology of clitics. Stanford: CSLI, 1995. Reviewed by Paola Monachesi, UiL OTS, Utrecht University, Trans 10, 35 12 JK Utrecht, The Netherlands. The book is a minimally revised version of the author™s 1992 dissertation. It con- stitutes a relevant contribution to the research on clitics, especially that on second position (2P) clitics. The book provides a comprehensive characterization of differ- ent aspects of cliticization. It is divided in three parts: the first one deals with the distribution of clitics, the second one focuses on lexical clitics while the last part deals with combinations of clitics in clitic clusters. A definition of what clitics are is lacking in the literature even though they have been the object of much study. Halpem does not make a contribution in this respect, thus he relies on diagnostics to define clitic-hood. Among the tests that he takes into consideration is the property that clitics are usually stressless/accentless and that they occupy certain particular positions within the clause. The book takes into con- sideration several types of clitics from the ones that occur in second position attested in Slavic languages to the lexical clitics present in Romance languages. The first part of the book is extensively dedicated to second position clitics (or ‚Wackemagel clitics™) in Serbo-Croatian. These are clitics which can occur either after the first phonological word (2W) or after the first syntactic constituent (2D). In Serbo-Croatian both possibilities are attested with the former being more literary and less common than the latter. However, there are other languages such as Pashto or Tagalog in which this alternation is more restricted since clitics can appear in 2D or in 2W according to the particular construction. Finally, there are languages such as Czech in which the clitics always appear in 2D while in some Native American lan- guages they are restricted to 2W. The aim of Halpem™s analysis is to deal with this variation. One crucial assump- tion behind his proposal is the fact that syntax is morphology and phonology free. Furthermore, he believes that while there is probably isomorphism between syntactic and morphological constituency this is not the case between syntactic and prosodic constituency. Clitics provide evidence in favor of the latter assumption since they owe their characteristic behaviour to a mismatch between syntax and prosody. This seems to be the case for 2P clitics given that syntactically they are adjoined to a max- imal projection, but prosodically they adjoin to a word to the left or to the right. The 037%2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(99)00054-6 512 Book review I Linguu 110 (2000) 511-515 direction of adjunction is determined by prosodic subcategorization. According to Halpem, Serbo-Croatian clitics are thus syntactically located at the edge of an IP (or CleftP, as argued later in the chapter), but they are prosodically adjoined to the end of the first prosodic word of the clause. This is due to the process of Prosodic Inver- sion which causes an inversion of the clitic and its host accounting in this way for the 2W distribution. In order to formalize this mechanism, Halpem suggests a modifica- tion of the Clitic Group formation algorithm proposed by Nespor and Vogel (1986). The existence of this constituent within prosodic structure has often been questioned (cf. Monachesi, 1999), however, Halpem accepts it without further discussion. A different solution is employed to deal with placement after the first constituent (2D) which is explained in terms of topicalization. The relevant phrase moves out of the constituent to which the clitic is attached to a position above the clitic. In this case, the clitic will adjoin prosodically to the last word of the syntactically preceding constituent. Halpem stipulates that when fronting takes place there is no prosodic inversion. More generally, prosodic inversion is only limited to those cases in which a clitic must be provided with a host. Thus, if a complementizer or a wh-element is present, no fronting or prosodic inversion occurs since the clitics have a possible host to combine with. A consequence of this treatment is that 2D is accounted for syntactically while 2W is dealt with prosodically. The possibility of accounting for the former also by means of prosody is considered and rejected. Halpem concludes that the first con- stituent cannot be defined in prosodic terms, but in syntactic ones. However, the whole discussion would have benefited from a more detailed presentation of prosodic constituency in Serbo-Croatian, especially to show that in 2W the first word really constitutes a prosodic word. A positive outcome of the analysis proposed is that it can deal with the comple- mentarity of 2D and 2W. The choice between the two positions does not need to be specified for a given clitic, this is a desirable result since languages do not distin- guish between clitics which can appear only in one position and not in the other. The situation is however different if 2P clitics are compared with verbal clitics. In lan- guages such as Pashto or Bulgarian a distinction is made between those clitics which belong to one group and those that belong to the other. Similarly while 2W and 2D are in complementary distribution this is not the case for 2P clitics and verbal clitics which can cooccur in the same sentence. A controversial feature of the analysis proposed by Halpem is represented by the mechanism of Prosodic Inversion. He tries, however, to give additional support for it by showing that it can also account for the placement of verbal clitics in languages such as Bulgarian and Old French. Bulgarian clitics precede the verb if they are not the first element of the clause otherwise they are enclitic on the verb. This behavior is accounted for by assuming that the clitics attach to a VP and then prosodic inversion takes place if there is no host available for them to attach. Similarly in the case of Old French. The analysis presented is thus similar to that suggested for Serbo-Croatian clitics. The 2P analysis proposed by Halpem is compared with previous accounts that rely either on syntax or on phonology providing convincing evidence that they are Book review i Lingua 110 (2000) 511-515 513 inferior to his own. He shows that a problem with pure syntactic analyses is that they cannot deal appropriately with the 2W distribution. On the other hand, nonsyntactic analyses such as that of Anderson (1992) have problems in explaining the comple- mentarity of the 2W/2D distribution. The first part of the book ends with a chapter on the structure of the Serbo-Croa- tian clause which leads to a revision of the 2P analysis. A novel projection is postu- lated, CleftP, to which clitics attach. The second part of the book deals with what Halpem defines as lexical clitics. Those are morphemes which seem to have the distribution of a clitic, but the mor- phology and/or phonology of an affix. One example is that of the English possessive, which appears at the right edge of a possessive NP being, however, lexically attached. Evidence in favor of the lexical attachment is provided by Zwicky (1987) who noted that the possessive is suppressed in the presence of other homophonous morphemes such as the plural, the third person singular present tense and the pos- sessive itself. Halpem proposes an Extended Inflection approach to lexical clitics which are thus considered inflectional affixes. He argues in favor of a feature based analysis which distinguishes between triggering features and marking features. The former ones are assigned to the syntactic structure by means of a rule or they are inserted freely on appropriate nodes, while the distribution of the latter ones is regulated by an appro- priate principle. The entire possessive NP is thus specified with the triggering feature POSS which will induce the percolation of the marking feature PM along the right edge of the NP down to the terminal node. Every word in the lexicon is inflected for PM, in most cases this corresponds to the addition of the possessive morpheme. However, if the word ends with an homophonous suffix, the possessive affix is sup- pressed while suppletive pronominal forms such as ‚my™ are marked POSS. Halpem shows that this apparatus can properly deal with the various properties of the English possessive marker while treating it as an inflectional affix. Furthermore, it can also deal with other cases of lexical clitics such as the definite article in Balkan lan- guages, which appears on the head of the first constituent of a definite NP. In this case, the trigger feature DEF is assigned to the definite NP, while the marking fea- ture DM percolates to the head daughter inducing the presence of the affixal deter- miner. It should be mentioned that marking features are specified as being FIRST, LAST or HEAD markings; in the case of the Balkan definite article the marking fea- ture is thus a HEAD feature, while in the case of the possessive it is a LAST feature. Similarly, triggering features are specified as being LEFT or RIGHT triggers; in the case of the Balkan definite article DEF is a LEFT trigger feature, while in the case of the English possessive POSS is a RIGHT trigger feature. Halpem takes into consideration other types of lexical clitics in languages such as Macedonian and French and he assimilates the verbal clitics to inflectional affixes. This view is also shared by Miller (1992) who provides detailed motivation in favor of the idea that French clitics should be treated as inflectional affixes. I have also argued in favor of this position in Monachesi (1999, to appear) where I have pre- sented evidence to support the idea that Italian and Romanian clitics exhibit affixal behavior. 514 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 511-515 The last part of the book is dedicated to clitic clusters. Given the similarities between clusters of affixes and clusters of clitics, Halpem suggests that they should be treated in the same way. In particular, he argues against the assumption that affixes combine with the stem one at a time forming a morphological constituent with it. Instead he suggests that the affixes merge together into a cluster which forms a morphological constituent of its own that ultimately attaches to the stem. He pro- vides ample evidence from Sekani that verbal inflection is better treated in this way. He shows that if the prefixes combine with the verb in a hierarchical fashion as in the analysis proposed by Hargus (1988) some problems are encountered since sev- eral phonological rules violate Bracket Erasure. However, this is not the case if the various prefixes combine into a phonological constituent which itself forms a con- stituent with the verbal stem resulting in a ‚compound™ structure. Furthermore, Halpem argues that this cluster constitutes not only a phonological constituent, but also a morphological one. The ‚compound hypothesis™ has proven successful also in the analysis of other languages, as shown by the treatment of the Nimboran verb by Inkelas (1993) or by the study of Simpson and Withgott (1986) which shows that also pronominal clitics merge into a morphological constituent before combining with the host. This is a view I also defend in Monachesi (1999) in the case of pronominal clitics in Italian and Napoletano. Another point argued for by Halpem in the last part of his book concerns the ordering of affixes/clitics. He claims that it cannot be determined by syntax, but instead morphology is responsible for it: clusters are formed in the lexicon. In par- ticular, he suggests that clitics/affixes subcategorize for the syntactic category to which they attach. They also subcategorize for a prosodic constituent of a certain type to their right or to their left. However, it is through morphological subcatego- rization that the order of the morphemes is determined. Each element is assigned a morphological description consisting of the size of the largest constituent that it might combine with and the size of the constituent which is formed by this combi- nation. It is thus possible to implement the traditional notion of morphological tem- plate. I am quite sympathetic with Halpem™s view that clitic/affix order cannot be dealt with in the syntax (cf. also Bonet, 1991). This is a position I have also tried to defend in Monachesi (1999) where I have shown that several factors play a role in the lin- earization of Italian clitics suggesting that it should be dealt with in the lexicon. Halpem™s work clearly represents a relevant contribution to the research on cliti- cization, his analysis of 2P clitics has generated interest and controversy, as well as his lexical approach to verbal clitics. His research on clitics plays also an important role in the debate on the organization of the grammar. Given their behavior, clitics represent a topic of central importance for the understanding of the interaction of the different modules. In Halpem™s book, clitics should be seen as a case study which gives support to his view on the way phonology, morphology and syntax interact. The book is quite heterogeneous theoretically. At first sight, this might be an advantage since it can appeal to a broad public working in different research tradi- tions. However, no attempt is made to integrate the various ideas borrowed from the different frameworks, resulting, in certain cases, in lack of unity. This is particularly Book review> I Lingua 110 (2000) 51 l-515 515 evident if one considers the analyses developed in the first and in the second part of the book. While the account of 2P clitics is sketched in a GB/PP framework relying thus on the basic assumptions behind this research tradition, the feature based analy- sis of lexical clitics presupposes a G/HPSG framework. It is not immediate to see how the two approaches could be reconciled. Halpem™s book is descriptively very rich: data from various languages are pre- sented and analysed, especially in the second part of the book where several types of lexical clitics are discussed. However, in many cases the analysis is only sketched lacking thus the precision that characterizes instead the treatment of Serbo-Croatian clitics. Despite these minor shortcomings, Halpem™s book is still a ‚must™ for anybody interested in cliticization and in the organization of the grammar. References Anderson, S., 1992. A-morphous morphology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Bonet, E., 1991. Morphology after syntax: Pronominal clitics in romance. Ph.D. thesis, MIT. Hargus, S., 1988. The lexical phonology of Sekani. New York: Garland. Inkelas, S., 1993. Nimboran position class morphology. NLLT 1 l(4), 559-624. Miller, P., 1992. Clitics and constituents in phrase structure grammar. New York: Garland. Monachesi, P., 1999. A lexical approach to Italian cliticization. Lecture Notes 84. Stanford: CSLI. Monachesi, P., to appear. Clitic placement in the Romanian verbal complex. In: B. Gerlach and J. Gri- jzenhout (eds.), Clitics. Linguistik Aktuell. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Nespor, M. and I. Vogel, 1986. Prosodic phonology. Dordrecht: For-is. Simpson, J. and M. Withgott, 1986. Pronominal clitic clusters and templates. In: H. Borer (ed.), The syn- tax of pronominal clitics. Syntax and semantics, Vol. 19, 1499174. New York: Academic Press. Zwicky, A., 1987. Suppressing the Z™s Journal of Linguistics 23(l), 133404. 