ELSEVIER On the Lingua 110 (2000) 473-495 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua development of transitive expletive constructions in the history of English* Tomoyuki Tanaka* Department of English, Tokyo Gakugei University, 4-l-l Nukuikita-machi, Koganei-shi. Tokyo, 184-8501, Japan Received 15 April 1999; revised version 15 October 1999 Abstract This paper aims to account for the development of transitive expletive constructions (TECs) in the history of English. Having demonstrated that TECs observed in the history of English, especially in Late Middle English and Early Modern English, patterned with those observed in some of the modern Germanic languages, it is argued that the decline of subject clitics in the fourteenth century triggered the change of feature specifications on functional heads, which in turn led to the rise of TECs. Then, the loss of TECs in the sixteenth century is shown to be a direct consequence of the change of clause structure triggered by the loss of ‚rich™ verbal morphology. 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Transitive expletive construction (TEC); Verbal morphology; Clause structure; Subject clitic; EPP feature 1. Introduction™ Various studies have been made within the framework of the Minimalist Program on the nature of the so-called ‚transitive expletive construction™ (henceforth, TEC) This is a revised version of the paper presented at the symposium of the 50th Annual Meeting of the English Literary Society of Japan, Chfibu at Nagoya University on October 25, 1998. I am grateful to Masachiyo Amano, Kazuhisa Ishikawa, Kozo Kato, Makoto Kondo, Yuka Makita, Yoshinobu Niwa, Hiroshi Terada, and an anonymous reviewer for their helpful comments and suggestions on an earlier version of this paper. This work is supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Japan Ministry of Education, Grant No. 10710226. Of course, all remaining inadequacies are my own. * Phone: +81 42 329 7274; E-mail: tanakat@u-gakugei.ac.jp 1 Here are the historical periods of English standardly assumed: Old English (70&l IOO), Middle Eng- lish (1100-1500) (Early Middle English, 1100-1300, Late Middle English, 1300-1500) Modem English 0378.2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-384 1(99)00053-4 414 T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473495 observed in some of the modern Germanic languages, where expletive there occurs with a transitive verb (Bobaljik, 1995; Bobaljik and Jonas, 1996; Bobaljik and Thrainsson, 1998; Bures, 1993; Chomsky, 1995; Jonas, 1996; Thrainsson, 1996): (1) Languages with TECs: Dutch, Faroese I, Frisian, German, Icelandic, Yiddish a. paB hafa margir jolasveinar bortraB bti8ing. there have many Christmas trolls eaten pudding ‚Many Christmas trolls have eaten puddings.™ b. Es essen einige Mause K&e in der Ktiche. there eat some mice cheese in the kitchen ‚There are some mice eating cheese in the kitchen.™ (Bobaljik and Jonas, 1996: 209; a: Icelandic, b: German) (2) Languages with no TECs: Afrikaans, Danish, Present-day English, Faroese II, Norwegian, Swedish a. *There has someone eaten an apple. b. *Det har nagon atit ett apple. there has someone eaten an apple ‚Someone has eaten an apple.™ (Bobaljik and Jonas, 1996: 208; a: Present-day English, b: Swedish) Whereas TECs are generally unacceptable in Present-day English as illustrated in (2a),™ a brief look at some dictionaries and literature reveals that they were indeed attested in early stages of English, especially in Late Middle English and Early Mod- em English (OED; MED; Breivik, 1983; Jacobsson, 1951; Jonas, 1996; Visser, 1963). This paper attempts to account for the development of TECs in the history of English in terms of the changes of clause structure and feature specifications on functional heads. In so doing, two factors are shown to be crucial for the develop- ment, that is, the decline of subject clitics in the fourteenth century (Van Kemenade, (1500-1900) (Early Modem English, 1500-1700, Late Modern English, 1700-1900), Present-day Eng- lish (1900-). In what follows, I will give both glosses and translations to Old English examples and only glosses to Middle English examples. 2 There are some apparent examples of Present-day English TECs observed in the literature (Bobaljik and Jonas, 1996; Bolinger, 1977; Chomsky, 1995; Kayne, 1979; Levin, 1993): (i) a. (?)Suddenly there entered the room a six-eyed troll. (Bobaljik and Jonas, 1996: 208) b. There was slowly making its way toward us a figure in black. (Bolinger, 1977: 102) c. There visited us last night a large group of people who traveled all the way from India. (Chomsky, 1995: 343) I follow Bobaljik and Jonas (1996) in assuming that examples such as (i) are derived by Heavy NP Shift of their subjects, and therefore should be distinguished from TECs found in some of the modem Ger- manic languages and Late Middle English/Early Modem English, in that the latter utilize two subject positions outside VP (see the references cited above (1) and the discussion in section 3). Alternatively, based on Bolinger™s (1977) observation that the transitive verb is part of a phrase that is a kind of seman- tically analytic intransitive in Present-day English ‚TECs™, examples such as (i) might be treated on a par with there-constructions with unaccusative verbs. T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473495 475 1987, 1997) and the loss of ‚rich™ verbal morphology in the sixteenth century (Roberts, 1993; Rohrbacher, 1999; Vikner, 1997). This paper assumes the framework of the Minimalist Program advocated by Chomsky (199.5), and the organization is as follows. Section 2 discusses the change of clause structure in the history of English on the basis of Thrainsson™s (1996) pro- posal on the relationship between clause structure and verbal morphology in the modern Germanic languages. Section 3 outlines the development of TECs in the his- tory of English and clarifies their syntactic properties as compared with those found in some of the modem Germanic languages. Section 4 examines the implications of the decline of subject clitics in the fourteenth century for the change of feature spec- ifications on functional heads, which is in turn argued to account for the develop- ment of TECs, together with the change of clause structure presented in section 2. Section 5 is a conclusion of this paper and briefly addresses the multiple specifier analysis of TECs proposed by Chomsky (1995). 2. The relationship between clause structure and verbal morphology Before discussing the development of TECs in the history of English, let us first review Thrainsson™s (1996) proposal on the relationship between clause structure and verbal morphology in the modem Germanic languages and then consider the change of clause structure in the history of English in its light. 2.1. Icelandic and Present-day English: Thrciinsson (1996) Based on the hypothesis that clause structure may vary from one language to another, Thrainsson (1996) argues that the modem Germanic languages are classi- fied into those with the clause structure in (3a) and those with the clause structure in (3b): (3) a. AgrP Spec Agr™ Agr /TP--L Spec A T VP b. A Spec /-I-L I VP 416 T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473495 He assumes that whether a language has (3a) or (3b) as its clause structure is deter- mined on the basis of the verbal morphology in the language in question. Let us illustrate this with the inflectional paradigms in Icelandic and Present-day English: (4) Icelandic reyk ‚smoke™ Present-day English smoke present past sg. 1 reyk-i reyk-t-i 2 reyk-ir reyk-t-ir 3 reyk-ir reyk-t-i pl. 1 reykj-urn reykj-t-urn 2 reyk-ia reyk-t-uB 3 reykj-a reykj-t-u smoke-Agr smoke-T-Agr (Thrainsson, 1996: 269) present past smoke smoke-d smoke smoke-d smoke-s smoke-d smoke smoke-d smoke smoke-d smoke smoke-d smoke-Agr smoke-T In Icelandic, tense and agreement morphemes are independent from each other, in the sense that they occur simultaneously in past tense. In Present-day English, on the other hand, tense and agreement morphemes do not occur simultaneously in any verb forms, but are in complementary distribution with each other. According to Thrainsson, the verbal morphology of Icelandic requires its clause structure to be as in (3a), which involves two functional categories Agr and T, so that the morphological features of the verb, realized as tense and agreement mor- phemes, can be successfully checked off. In contrast, since only one of the tense and agreement morphemes is realized on the verb in Present-day English, it is necessary to postulate only one I-type functional category to check off its morphological fea- ture. Therefore, (3b) is chosen as the clause structure of Present-day English.3 One of the consequences of this analysis discussed by Thrainsson (1996), which will be relevant for the analysis of the historical development of TECs to be pre- sented below, is that it enables us to attribute the availability of TECs to the verbal morphology in the relevant languages. Since TECs involve two subjects, i.e. exple- tive there and the indefinite subject, there must be two subject positions available to host these two elements. Therefore, TECs are allowed in languages like Icelandic which have the clause structure in (3a) with two subject positions, [Spec, AgrP] and [Spec, TP]. In languages like Present-day English which have the clause structure in (3b), on the other hand, TECs are impossible because there is only one subject posi- tion, [Spec, IP]. If this is correct, it will be predicted that TECs are only allowed in languages where tense and agreement morphemes appear simultaneously on the verb. I refer the reader to Bobaljik (1995), Bobaljik and Thrainsson (1998), and Thrainsson (1996), where this correlation between the availability of TECs and ‚rich™ verbal morphology is verified for the languages listed in (1) and (2). ™ Bobaljik (1995) proposes basically the same analysis which is built upon the non-lexicalist hypothe- sis that inflectional morphemes are inserted into functional heads. See also Bobaljik and ThrGnsson (1998). T. Tanaka I Lingua 1 IO (2000) 473-495 477 2.2. Clause structure and verbal morphology in the history of English With these assumptions in mind, let us consider the relationship between the loss of verbal morphology and the development of clause structure in the history of English. First, the inflectional paradigm of weak verbs of class I in Old English is pre- sented below (Mitchell and Robinson, 1992; Ono and Nakao, 1980): (5) Old English: deman ‚judge™ present past sg. 1 dem-e dem-d-e 2 dem-(e)st dem-d-est 3 dem-(e)b dem-d-e pl. l-3 dem-ab dem-d-on dem-Agr dem-T-Agr Although the plural verb form of each tense is the same for all persons, tense and agreement morphemes appear simultaneously in past tense, as in the Icelandic inflec- tional paradigm. This indicates that Old English had the clause structure in (3a) with both Agr and T. Second, judging from the following inflectional paradigm of weak verbs of class I in Middle English (Moss& 1952; Nakao, 1972), it seems plausible to assume that Middle English also had the clause structure in (3a):4 (6) Middle English: demen ‚judge™ present past sg. 1 dem-e dem-d-e 2 dem-(e)st dem-d-est 3 dem-(e)b dem-d-e pl. l-3 dem-b/e(n) dem-d-e(n) dem-Agr dem-T-Agr Then, verbal morphology was gradually lost in the course of Middle English, with the result that the inflectional paradigm of regular verbs became as in (7) by the 4 (6) is based on the Midland and southern dialects. As is well-known, the northern dialect underwent a radical reduction of verbal morphology earlier in Middle English. But as we will see in section 4, TECs were indeed attested in the northern texts written by Richard Rolle (see 32). This would point to the con- clusion that the northern dialect in Late Middle English still had the clause structure in (3a) with ‚rich™ verbal morphology. This conclusion seems to be consistent with Vikner™s (1997) claim that the verbal morphology of the northern dialect was still ‚rich™ enough in Late Middle English to trigger overt verb movement; indeed, he cites the inflectional paradigm where agreement and tense morphemes appear simultaneously in past tense. But see Kroch and Taylor (1997) for partially different views on the verbal morphology and overt verb movement in the northern dialect, whose consequences for the current analy- sis I will not discuss here. 478 T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473-495 beginning of the sixteenth century (Araki and Ukaji, 1984; Barber, 1997; Gijlarch, 1991):5 (7) Early Modern English: deem present past sg. 1 deem deem-ed 2 deem-(e)st deem-ed-(e)st 3 deem-eth deem-ed pl. l-3 deem deem-ed deem-Agr deem-T(-Agr?) It must be noticed in (7) that both tense and agreement morphemes are realized on the second person singular form in past tense. For the following reasons, however, I argue that this form does not constitute evidence for postulating the clause structure in (3a). The second person singular ending -(e)st was used in combination with thou, but it fell into disuse during the seventeenth century with the decline of the latter (Barber, 1997; Giilarch, 1991). Strang (1970) goes even further and argues that by 1570 there was practically no distinction of person, number, or mood in the past of any normal verb (which is in accordance with Pyles™ 1964 remark that -(e)st already began to disappear in the sixteenth century). These observations will naturally lead us to assume that -(e)st was already regarded as an archaism in the sixteenth century, and therefore played no active role in determining the clause structure in this period. In particular, suppose that the morphological feature of the verb realized as -(e)st is invisible to the computation and hence is exempted from feature checking, so that the form deem-ed-(e)st does not lead to the postulation of both Agr and T. We would thus be led to conclude that evidence for positing the clause structure in (3a) was lost by the beginning of the sixteenth century, when the inflectional paradigm became as in (7); as a result, English came to have the clause structure in (3b) during the six- teenth century. 3. Transitive expletive constructions in Late Middle English and Early Modern English Given the historical development of clause structure proposed in the previous sec- tion, it would be predicted that TECs had been allowed in Old and Middle English because there are two subject positions, [Spec, AgrP] and [Spec, TP], in the clause structure (3a) of these periods; then, they became obsolete during the sixteenth cen- tury with the change of clause structure from (3a) to (3b). This prediction, however, is partly incorrect. According to Breivik™s (1983) comprehensive investigation of the development of there-constructions from Old to Early Modem English, TECs had not been observed in Old and Early Middle English and first appeared in the four- s In (7), I put aside the plural endings -es, -eth, and -en, sometimes found in the sixteenth and seven- teenth centuries, as minority usages, along the lines of Barber (1997). T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473495 419 teenth century. Then, they had been attested for about two centuries, but became obsolete during the sixteenth century (Jonas, 1996; Visser, 1963). Here follow a number century (8) a. b. (9) a. b. (10) a. b. of examples of TECs: (8) from the fourteenth century, (9) from the fifteenth and (10) from the sixteenth century: withoute these . . . Ther may no kyng lede gret lordship without these there may no king lead great lordship (Cast. Love (Hallw.) 306 / OED) P er schal non of pe wardeyns make none newe there shall none of the wardens make no new statutes statutes ne newe ordinances withoute assent of alle pe bretherhede nor new ordinances without assent of all the brotherhood (BLE London Guilds III. 87-8 / Breivik, 1983: 302) the (= ther) schall no man bete ne bynde a messyng there shall no man beat nor bind a messenger (DC. Prov. p.49 / MED) but without any such thyng proued before ther wyll no but without any such thing proved before there will no reason nor good conscyence bere it reason nor good conscience bear it (More 106. 5-7 / Breivik, 1983: 318) there can no greater plage inuade a commen wealth (J. Daus tr. Sleidane™s Comm. 155 / OED) there shall no poore neighbour of mine bere no losse by any chance happened in my house (More in Four C. Eng. Lett. 12 / OED) Therefore, the loss of TECs immediately follows from the change of clause structure from (3a) to (3b) in the sixteenth century.6 However, one might ask why TECs had been unattested in Old and Early Middle English which had the clause structure in (3a). Before dealing with this problem, let us investigate syntactic properties of TECs in Late Middle English/Early Modern English. In what follows, I will present evi- dence for the structure in (1 l), where expletive there and the indefinite subject occupy [Spec, AgrP] and [Spec, TP], respectively.7 This is exactly the same structure 6 Although they were extremely rare, TECs were indeed observed in the seventeenth century: (i) there shall no Sunne nor Weather overwanne him (Austin Medit. (1635) 291 / OED) On the basis of a brief survey of OED 2 on CD-ROM, I have found three examples of TECs in the sev- enteenth century, including (i). It might therefore be the case that the clause structure in (3a) was still available (though marginally) in the seventeenth century. ™ In (1 l), I tentatively assume that modals (especially, epistemic modals), which typically appear in Late Middle English/Early Modem English TECs, are base-generated in T and then move to Agr, though nothing hinges on this assumption. See Van Kemenade (1992) and Warner (1982, 1993) for related dis- cussion. 480 T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2OOOj 473495 that is standardly assumed for TECs observed in some of the modem Germanic lan- guages (Bobaljik, 1995; Bobaljik and Jonas, 1996; Jonas, 1996):s (11) [*a+. ther [Agr, may, [rp no kyngj [r, ti [vp tj lede gret lordship I]]]] (= 8a) First, that the indefinite subject of TECs occupies some position external to VP, not the VP-internal subject position, is suggested by the following examples: (12) a. here may no man pis doom repele there may no man this doom repeal (Body & Soul in Anglia II. 243 /Jonas, 1996: 153) b. here coupe no man it aquenche wip no craft there could no man it quench with no craft (Trevisa Higden (Rolls) I. 223 / OED) Van der Wurff (1997) argues that OV orders (where 0 is a full DP) sometimes found in Late Middle English are derived by Object Shift, and the shifted objects are located in [Spec, AgroP]. He further argues that in configurations where a pronomi- nal object precedes the governing verb or the negative not, the former is raised to a higher position than [Spec, AgroP] (see also Ishikawa, 1997). If these arguments are on the right track, it follows that the objects (his doom in 12a and it in 12b), which precede their governing verbs, have moved at least as high as [Spec, AgroP]. This in turn indicates that the indefinite subject of TECs in Late Middle English/Early Mod- em English is VP-external, as in the case of TECs observed in some of the modem Germanic languages (see footnote S), because it occurs to the left of the shifted object, as shown in the position of no man in (12). Next, it will be obvious from the example in (13) that expletive there occupies some position internal to AgrP, not [Spec, CP] (as is sometimes suggested for the Germanic verb second languages; Holmberg and Platzack, 1995 ; Vikner, 1995): (13) but unethe schal ther any wight mowe seen it or come thereto but hardly shall there any person be-able see it or come thereto (Chaucer Boece V. Prosa 6. 169-172 / Breivik, 1983: 303) In (13), the preposing of the negative adverb unethe ‚hardly™ triggers subject auxil- iary inversion, with unethe in [Spec, CP] and schal in Co, respectively, under the standard assumption. Then, ther appears somewhere internal to AgrP, since it occurs after the fronted auxiliary in C O 9 The same analysis is also supported by the exam- . ples in (14), where TECs appear in embedded clauses: * In contrast, Sigur&son (1991) and Vikner (1995) claim that the indefinite subject of TECs occupies [Spec, VP]. However, their claim cannot be maintained, because there is ample evidence that the indef- inite subject of TECs is VP-external: it appears to the left of VP adverbs, negative elements, or shifted objects. See the references cited in the text. 9 Notice that (13) provides another argument that the indefinite subject of TECs is VP-external. In this sentence, which involves two modals, the indefinite subject any wight precedes the second, non-finite modal mowe, indicating that it occupies a higher position than the VP headed by seen, the specifier of which is presumably the base-generated position of the subject. See also (17a). T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473495 481 (14) a. b. yow liketh knowen of the fare of me, whos wo you pleases know of the fare of me whose woe ther may no wit discryve there may no wit describe (Chaucer TC V. 1366-1367 / MED) but kynge Arthur was so currageous that there myght no but king Arthur was so courageous that there might no maner of knyght lette hym to lande S0I-t of kight hinder him to land (Malory 65. 15-17 / Breivik, 1983: 318) Van Kemenade (1997) convincingly argues that some apparent cases of embedded topicalization in Old and Middle English, which are found in other contexts than complements to bridge verbs, are reduced to a set of exceptional constructions involving unaccusative verbs, where ‚topicalization™ occurs within IP, as opposed to topicalization in main clauses which involves the CP-level as well (see below).‚O This means that CP-recursion was not allowed in Old and Middle English embedded clauses except those selected by bridge verbs. In particular, CP-recursion is gener- ally taken to be impossible in a relative clause like (14a) and an adverbial clause like (14b), because the two types of clauses strongly resist embedded topicalization even in languages like Icelandic which allow embedded topicalization quite freely (Jonas, 1996; Vikner, 1995). Then, the possibility of TECs in embedded clauses without CP-recursion as in (14) strongly suggests that expletive there occurs in some AgrP- internal position in Late Middle English/Early Modern English TECs. Taken the conclusions drawn from the examples in (12)-( 14) altogether, it fol- lows that both expletive there and the indefinite subject occur somewhere external to VP and internal to AgrP in Late Middle English/Early Modem English TECs. Then, we are naturally led to conclude that they had the same structure as those observed in some of the modem Germanic languages, i.e. (1 l), where expletive there and the indefinite subject occupy [Spec, AgrP] and [Spec, TP], respectively. A striking confirmation of the availability of two subject positions in Late Middle English/Early Modem English comes from a consideration of two other types of there-constructions. One is the so-called ‚passive expletive construction™ (hence- forth, PEC) in the terminology of Jonas (1996), where expletive there occurs with a passive participle. Paying attention to one of its subtypes in which the indefinite sub- ject immediately follows the first or finite auxiliary and precedes passive be as illus- trated in (15), Jonas argues that this subtype of PEC is only allowed in languages like Icelandic which have two subject positions available, because there and the indefinite subject occupy [Spec, AgrP] and [Spec, TP], respectively, as in the case of TECs : Iﬂ Van Kemenade argues that [Spec, IP] ([Spec, AgrP] or [Spec, TP] in the current analysis) was avail- able for fronted topics in such constructions. Here, I will not deal with the derivation of these exceptional constructions, which requires a different feature specification on functional heads from those proposed in section 4 on the basis of examples of main clause topicalization. 482 T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473495 (15) PaB hafa nokkar kokur veriB bakaaar fyrir veisluna there have some cakes been baked for the party ‚Some cakes have been baked for the party.™ (Jonas, 1996: 61; Icelandic) Given the discussion so far, it is predicted that besides TECs, this subtype of PEC was also attested in Late Middle English/Early Modern English which had the clause structure in (3a) with two subject positions available. This prediction is borne out, as shown in the following examples collected from The Paston letters and papers of the fifteenth century (Davis, ed., 1971, 1976; henceforth, PL) (see Breivik, 1983; Jacob- sson, 1951; Jonas, 1996; and Tanaka, 1999, for more examples in Late Middle Eng- lish/Early Modem English) : (16) a. there shall no defaute be founde in here there shall no default be found in here (PL 190. 72) b. ther shall no mony be takyn at Saxthorp tyll thys terme be past there shall no money be taken at Saxthorp till this term be past (PL 340. 1) c. ther cann noo conclusion be taken to myn avayle without help of your there can no conclusion be taken to my avail without help of your maistership mastership (PL 574. 39) Another type of there-construction to be noticed here is the one with an unac- cusative verb, where the indefinite subject immediately follows the first or finite auxiliary and precedes the unaccusative verb (see Jacobsson, 1951, for more exam- ples in Late Middle English/Early Modem English): (17) a. ther shall no man dar appere in pe place there shall no man dare appear in the place (PL 204. 16) b. ther schulde non come nouther to hym nor to hes brother there should none come neither to him nor to his brother (PL 746. 20) In (16) and (17) (which exhibit the word order unattested in Present-day English), it seems apparent that the indefinite subject has moved from the complement position of V to some position external to VP. It must then be that there are two subject posi- tions external to VP to host both expletive there and the indefinite subject. There- fore, these historical facts constitute independent evidence that [Spec, AgrP] and [Spec, TP] were available in Late Middle English/Early Modem English.ﬁ*‚* ﬂ Investigating the historical development of examples such as (16) and (17) is beyond the scope of this paper. I refer the reader to Tanaka (1999), where it is argued, on the basis of investigations of OED 2 on CD-ROM, that examples such as (16) first appeared in the fourteenth century and became rare after the seventeenth century, which seems to coincide roughly with the development of TECs as described above. I will leave the development of examples such as (17) open for future research. ‚* An anonymous reviewer suggested to me the possibility that the indefinite subject of Late Middle English/Early Modem English TECs occupies [Spec, NegP], pointing out that the examples of TECs 4. T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473495 483 The development of TECs in the history of English: A view from feature checking and clause structure Summarizing the discussion so far, I have argued that Old and Middle English had the clause structure in (3a), and then the loss of ‚rich™ verbal morphology led to the change of clause structure from (3a) to (3b) in the sixteenth century. Further- more, the fact that TECs of the same type found in some of the modem Germanic languages became obsolete during the sixteenth century was shown to follow from the change of clause structure. However, since TECs came to be observed only after the fourteenth century, as we saw in the previous section, a problem will immedi- ately arise: why had TECs been unattested in Old and Early Middle English, in spite of the clause structure (3a) of these periods, where two subject positions would be available? This section examines more closely the nature of subject positions in the history of English, basically along the lines of Hulk and Van Kemenade (1997) with some modifications, and argues that two subject positions became available with the decline of subject clitics in the fourteenth century, thereby leading to the appearance of TECs. 4.1. The decline of subject clitics and subject positions in the history of English Let us begin by reviewing the distribution of nominal (i.e. full NP/DP) subjects and pronominal subjects in Old English main clauses, which typically exhibited so- called ‚verb second phenomena™ (see Van Kemenade, 1987, among others). In main clauses introduced by nlh-elements, negative elements, or adverbs like ,ba, the finite verb occupies the second position in front of the subject, regardless of whether the subject is nominal or pronominal, as in the following examples involving wh-ele- ments (Vf = finite verb): given in the text almost all involve negative subjects. It is true that the indefinite subject of TECs is itself negative or involves a negative polarity item in the overwhelming majority of the examples cited in the literature and those found in the investigations of PL and OED 2 on CD-ROM, but TECs are sometimes found with non-negative subjects, as illustrated in (i): (i) a. so that ere the morning, from three of the clocke the day before, there had fifteene several1 Armados assailed her (Raleigh 151 / Jacobsson, 1951: 208) b. Peter, knowing that there woulde some Iewes reproue this his doing (Udall, etc. Erasm. Par. Acts 43b / OED) Moreover, there is evidence at least for the PEC of the type illustrated in (16) that the indefinite subject does not occupy [Spec, NegP], because it appears to the right of not as shown in (ii): (ii) there may not any occasion be giuen to shake or rogge vpon the other (Surflet Countrie Farme ii. Ixii. 404 / OED) Whether not is a head or specifier of NegP in Late Middle English/Early Modem English, (ii) indicates that the indefinite subject occupies a position lower than NegP, which is naturally taken to be [Spec, TP] under the assumption that NegP is located between AgrP and TP (Hulk and Van Kemenade, 1997; Ishikawa, 1995; Roberts, 1993). Therefore, I keep to the assumption in the text that the two subject posi- tions available in Late Middle English/Early Modern English are [Spec, AgrP] and [Spec, TP], and the indefinite subject of TECs occupies [Spec, TP] as schematized in (11). 484 T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473-495 (18) whlnegfadv - Vf - nominallpronominal subject a. hwi wolde God swa lytles binges him forwyman why would God so small thing him deny ‚why should God deny him such a small thing™ (&Horn. I. 14. 2 / Hulk and Van Kemenade, 1997: 186) b. for hwam noldest bu Be sylfe me gecyBan @et for what not-wanted you yourself me make known that ‚wherefore would you not want to reveal to me yourself that™ @SL XxX111. 307 / Hulk and Van Kemenade, 1997: 186) On the other hand, in main clauses introduced by topic elements, the position of the finite verb differs with nominal and pronominal subjects: it occupies the second position in front of a nominal subject, but appears after a pronominal subject, as shown in the following contrast: (19) a. topic - Vf- nominal subject on twam pingum h%fde God paes mannes sawle gegodod in two things had God the man™s soul endowed ‚with two things God had endowed man™s soul™ (&Horn. I. 20. 1 / Hulk and Van Kemenade, 1997: 186) b. topic - pronominal subject - Vf be Barn we magon suiBe swutule oncnawan Bat by that we may very clearly perceive that ‚by that we may perceive that very clearly™ (CP 181. 16 / Hulk and Van Kemenade, 1997: 187) Since Van Kemenade™s (1987) seminal work on the clause structure of Old Eng- lish, various proposals have been made to account for these word order patterns within the framework of generative grammar. Among them, I will basically follow Hulk and Van Kemenade™s (1997) proposal in terms of two functional projections between CP and VP, with some modifications. One of their most important claims is that pronominal subjects are clitics in Old English (Van Kemenade, 1987, 1997; Pintzuk, 1991) and therefore appear in a position higher than nominal subjects, for which they present multiple negation facts as independent evidence. They indeed postulate a functional head F in the sense of Uriagereka (1995) between C and T, and argue that pronominal subjects appear in [Spec, FP], whereas nominal subjects appear in [Spec, TP]. Instead, keeping to the clause structure in (3a) for Old English with AgrP dominating TP, I assume that [Spec, AgrP] is a clitic position for pronom- inal subjects. This assumption is compatible with the basic idea shared by a number of linguists that a clitic, being a bundle of (a-features, must be associated with Agr, a locus of 0-features (Ishikawa, 1997; Laentzlinger, 1998; Roberts, 1995, 1997). With this in mind, let us consider the word order patterns in (18) and (19) on the basis of the following structure (SUB = subject): I3 I3 Here I regard pronominal subjects in Old English as XP elements (following Hulk and Van Keme- nade, 1997), as opposed to the somewhat standard view that they are XOelements (Van Kemenade, 1987; T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473495 485 Spec & whltopic C AgrP I 03 Spec Agr™ A/-I pronominal SUB Agr IA (Vf) Spec &A nominal SUB T VP According to Hulk and Van Kemenade, the finite verb moves to C in main clauses introduced by w/z-elements, negative elements, and adverbs like /xz; therefore, the finite verb always appears in the second position in front of the subject, regardless of whether the subject is nominal or pronominal, as shown in (18). On the other hand, they assume that in topic-initial main clauses, the finite verb moves only to Agr,14 where it is followed by a nominal subject (in [Spec, TP]) as in (19a), or preceded by a pronominal subject (in [Spec, AgrP]) as in (19b). Hence, the word order patterns in Old English main clauses fall under the current version of Hulk and Van Keme- nade™s (1997) analysis which utilizes Agr instead of F.r5 Then, the positional discrepancy between nominal and pronominal subjects in topic-initial main clauses began to disappear in the second half of the fourteenth cen- Roberts, 1997). Therefore, they would rather be designated as ‚weak pronouns™ in the sense of Cardi- naletti and Starke™s (1994) elaborated system of pronominal elements, where weak pronouns are defi- cient XPs as distinguished from clitics which are deficient Xﬂs. However, I will continue to use the term ‚clitic™ to refer to the special behavior of pronominal subjects in Old (and Early Middle) English. I4 They do not provide an explanation of why the landing site of verb movement differs depending on the first constituent in [Spec, CP], just noting that topic elements do not draw the finite verb to C in all historical stages of English (Kiparsky, 1995; Pintzuk, 1991). It might then be that &-elements, negative elements, and adverbs like pa are operators which require Spec-head agreement, and therefore draw the finite verb to C, essentially along the lines of Rizzi™s (1996) W&Criterion or its counterpart in terms of Checking Theory in the Minimalist Program (Chomsky, 1995: 289ff.). I5 In topic-intial main clauses, the finite verb sometimes appears in the third position following the nominal subject, as observed by Kiparsky (1995) and Koopman (1998), among others: (i) swelcum monnum Dryhten cidde purh bone witgan such men Lord reproached through the prophet ‚the Lord reproached such men through the prophet™ (CP 27. 12 / Kiparsky, 1995: 145) Such examples might be analyzed as involving movement of the finite verb only to T. There are also a small number of main clauses where the finite verb appears in final position (Kiparsky, 1995; Koopman, 1995; Pintzuk, 1991), which might indicate the possibility that the finite verb does not move at all from its base-generated position. 486 T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473-495 tury, with the result that the finite verb came to appear after the subject, regardless of whether the subject is nominal or pronominal, by the early fifteenth century (Hulk and Van Kemenade, 1997; Van Kemenade, 1987, 1997): (21) topic - nominallpronominal subject - Vf a. by pis same skyle hope and sorwe schulle iugen us by this same skill hope and sorrow shall judge us (Wycl. Serm. 361.42 / Van Kemenade, 1997: 349) b. for more ioy3e bei myhte not haue for more joy they could not have (Wycl. Serm. 382. 106 / Van Kemenade, 1997: 349) One might argue that this word order change was due to the loss of verb movement to Agr, along the lines of Hulk and Van Kemenade (1997). However, this argument runs counter to the standard assumption that verb movement to Agr was lost in the sixteenth century (Roberts, 1993; Rohrbacher, 1999; Vikner, 1997). Moreover, if the structure of TECs as argued for in (11) is correct, verb movement to Agr was still operative from the fourteenth to sixteenth century, when TECs were observed with any frequency. Thus, the rise of the word order pattern in (21) must be accounted for without recourse to the change of verb movement. Instead, there seems to have been a change in the positioning of subjects from the second half of the fourteenth century to the early fifteenth century. Indeed, Van Kemenade (1987, 1997) argues (contra Hulk and Van Kemenade, 1997) that a pronominal subject lost its clitic status during this period, with the result that nomi- nal and pronominal subjects came to appear in the same position. In line with this reasoning, I propose that [Spec, AgrP], formerly restricted to subject clitics, became available for nominal as well as pronominal subjects, as shown in the following structure (see below for the reason why [Spec, AgrP], not [Spec, TP], became a canonical position for subjects) : (22) Spec /\A whltopic C AgrP ™ - WI Spec Agr™ & A (pro)nominal SUB Agr I A Wf) T VP Then, the rise of the word order pattern in (21) is an immediate consequence of the change in the positioning of subjects: in (22), both nominal and pronominal subjects occupy [Spec, AgrP] and precede the finite verb which has moved to Agr. T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473495 487 4.2. The EPP feature, clause structure, and the development of TECs in the history of English We are now in a position to provide an account of the development of TECs in the history of English in terms of the change of clause structure presented in section 2, together with the historical change of subject positions, which is based on Hulk and Van Kemenade (1997) with some modifications made in the previous subsection. In so doing, I will recast the conclusions reached in the previous subsection in terms of the change of feature specifications on functional heads. I will follow Chomsky (1995) in assuming that the EPP feature is [nominal], which requires a nominal category (whether NP or DP) in its specifier. In addition, I will postulate a feature [clitic] requiring a pronominal clitic; some feature of this kind will be nec- essary within the framework of the Minimalist Program to capture the dislocated properties of clitics observed in a number of languages (Sportiche, 1998; Uriagereka, 1995). First of all, consider the distribution of subjects in Old English. As we saw in the previous subsection, only pronominal subjects appear in [Spec, AgrP] whereas nom- inal subjects (NP or DP) appear in [Spec, TP]. This will lead to the following feature specification on Agr and T in the clause structure of Old English (where [clitic] is optional): (23) AgrP Spec Agr™ (,cZiL]) YTPL Spec A T VP [nominal] I will first deal with the derivation of typical sentences containing nominal and pronominal subjects such as (18) and (19), and then turn to the impossibility of TECs in Old English. In a sentence with a nominal subject, as schematized in (24) the nominal subject raises overtly to [Spec, TP] to satisfy [nominal], and it enters into a checking relation with the Nominative Case feature of T (notice that Agr does not have [clitic] in this case). I6 In a sentence with a pronominal subject, as schema- I6 Since a nominal subject occupies [Spec, TP] in overt syntax, one might wonder how its o-features are checked off against Agr. I will suggest two possibilities here. The first possibility is that a nominal subject moves covertly to [Spec, AgrP] to enter into a (d-feature checking relation with Agr. Second, it might be possible that it does not move to [Spec, Agr] covertly (as well as overtly), assuming that its 0- features are interpretable and hence do not have to be checked off, along the lines of Chomsky (1995). In contrast, the 0-features of V are uninterpretable, so that it moves to Agr and enters into a 0-feature checking relation with Agr in accordance with the assumptions in section 2. 488 T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473495 tized in (25) the pronominal subject first moves to [Spec, TP] to satisfy [nominal] and enter into a checking relation with the Nominative Case feature of T, and then moves further to [Spec, AgrP] to satisfy [clitic] : I7 (24) lAgrP Agr [rP nominal SUBi [r, T[nominal] [vp ti . . . I]]] (cf. 18a and 19a) (25) [*srP pronominal SUBi [Agr, Agr[clitic] [rP t™, [r. T[nominal] [vp ti . . . I]]]] (cf. 18b and 19b) Turning now to the absence of TECs in Old English, the following two possible derivations should be taken into account, since [clitic] is an optional feature of Agr in the clause structure (23) (OB = object): (26) *Lgrp there Lgr, Agr[clitic] [rP SUBi [r, T[nominal] [vp t, OB I]]]] (27) *LAgrP there Lgr, Agr ]rP SUBi [T, Tbminall [VP t, OB 11111 The derivation in (26) is straightforwardly excluded: [clitic] enters into a checking relation with the categorial feature [D] of there, causing the derivation to be can- celled because of feature mismatch, or if features cannot be checked under feature mismatch, then [clitic], an uninterpretable feature, remains unchecked (Chomsky, 1995: 307ff.). The derivation in (27) can be excluded with recourse to the nature of set-Merge (substitution) as formulated in Chomsky (1998). Chomsky argues that set- Merge applies only if it satisfies (selectional) requirements of one of the merged ele- ments, especially the target which projects. Applying this to merger of expletives, it will follow that they can be merged only to satisfy the EPP requirement of Agr or T. If this is correct, merger of there is blocked in (27) because Agr does not have an EPP feature. In sum, although Old English had the clause structure with both Agr and T, [Spec, AgrP] was restricted to pronominal subjects; consequently, there could be no cases where [Spec, AgrP] and [Spec, TP] were utilized simultaneously in the I7 Hulk and Van Kemenade (1997) argue that pronominal objects are also clitics in Old English and can appear in the same position as pronominal subjects, [Spec, AgrP] in the current analysis. I will sim- ply assume that they can move to [Spec, AgrP] to satisfy the clitic feature of Agr and do not interfere with any checking relations holding between Agr and other elements, such as the subject and the finite verb (see footnote 16 for related discussion). More complex cases sometimes found in Old English are those in which both subject and object clitics appear in [Spec, AgrP], as illustrated in (i): (i) mid his mode he hit steal fleon with his spirit he it shall flee ‚he shall flee from it with his spirit™ (CP 46. 17 / Pintzuck, 1991: 261) As for the derivation of such cases, I will suggest two possibilities in accordance with the current analy- sis. First, it might be suggested that both subject and object clitics enter into checking relations with the clitic feature of Agr, resulting in multiple specifiers at the level of AgrP. The plausibility of this sugges- tion will in part depend on whether the postulation of multiple specifiers is independently motivated, but see section 5 for arguments against the multiple specifier analysis of TECs proposed by Chomsky (1995). A second, perhaps more plausible possibility would be that one of the two clitics moves to adjoin to the other, which has already moved to [Spec, AgrP] to satisfy the clitic feature of Agr. Under this alternative, the former instance of movement would not be triggered by feature checking, but only reflect the general tendency that clitics form a cluster. See Laentzlinger (1998) for the clustering properties of clitics in the Germanic and Romance languages. T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473-495 489 same sentence, except those with pronominal subjects (see 25). Therefore, TECs, which require two VP-external subject positions to be available, were not allowed in Old English.‚s As we saw in the previous subsection, a pronominal subject lost its clitic status from the second half of the fourteenth century to the early fifteenth century. As a result, both nominal and pronominal subjects came to appear in [Spec, AgrP] (see 22), which implies that there was a shift of the EPP feature from T to Agr. The link between the loss of subject clitics and the shift of the EPP feature can be accounted for in the following way. First, once subject clitics (as well as object clitics; see Van Kemenade, 1987) were lost, the clitic feature of Agr in (23) became superfluous, because it could no longer enter into a checking relation with any elements. Indeed, if it were to be selected as Agr enters the numeration, it would remain unchecked, causing the derivation to crash. Therefore, there is good reason to suppose that the clitic feature of Agr disappeared with the loss of subject clitics. Then, the shift of the EPP feature from T to Agr would be a natural move, because there seems to be a general requirement that the EPP feature be located in the highest inflectional head (unless it is the locus of any other feature like [clitic] requiring a particular cate- gory), as argued by Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou (1998) Laentzlinger (1998), Jonas (1996), and McCloskey (1996, 1997).‚ﬂ If these arguments are on the right track, it follows that there was a change of feature specifications on Agr and T trig- gered by the loss of subject clitics from the second half of the fourteenth century to the early fifteenth century, giving rise to (28): i8 Van Kemenade (1987) argues that expletive there is a clitic in Old English, citing the following example: (i) on ZIaem dagum beer waeron twa cwena in these days there were two queens ‚(?)there were two queens in these days™ (Oros. 46. 36 / Van Kemenade, 1987: I 11) In (i), which is an instance of a topic-initial main clause, it might at first sight appear that the expletive juzr- patterns with a pronominal subject in that it occupies the position between the topic and the finite verb (see 19b). If this example were to count as evidence for the clitic status of expletive there, it would be wrongly predicted that TECs were allowed in Old English. As Van Kemenade herself notes, how- ever, this word order pattern was extremely rare and the one without there was by far the overwhelm- ing majority (see also Breivik, 1983). Furthermore, since (i) does not contain any locative expression, it is likely that jmr is a locative adverb itself, in which case it is no wonder that it behaves like a clitic (see Van Kemenade, 1987, for ample evidence that locative there is a clitic in Old English). Thus, there is reason to assume that Van Kemenade™s argument for the clitic status of expletive there is insuffi- cient. I9 The exact nature of this requirement remains to be clarified. Here, I will briefly address two empir- ical arguments for this requirement. First, in languages like Icelandic which allow TECs and therefore have the clause structure in (3a) under the current analysis, expletives are inserted in [Spec, AgrP], not [Spec, TP] (Jonas, 1996). Second, Celtic languages like Irish, which lack EPP effects (such as expletives and their associated syntax), allow VSO sentences, where the specifier position of the highest inflec- tional head, [Spec, AgrP] under the current analysis, remains empty, with [Spec, TP] filled by the sub- ject (Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou, 1998; McCloskey, 1996, 1997). Both of these arguments will point to the conclusion that Agr is the locus of the EPP feature. See also Laentzlinger (1998) for the same conclusion reached on the basis of French complex inversion. 490 T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473495 (28) AgrP Spec Agr™ Agr [nominal] A Spec _,-‚:---._ T VP Let us now consider the distribution of subjects in the period with the clause structure and feature specification in (28). As opposed to the situation in Old and Early Middle English, both nominal and pronominal subjects raise overtly to [Spec, AgrP] to satisfy [nominal], as well as to enter into a checking relation with the Nom- inative Case feature of T raised to Agr along with V, as illustrated in (29): (29) [AgrP (pro)nominal SUBi [Agr, V-T-Agr[nominal] [TP tT [vp ti . . . I]]] (cf. 21) Notice that the change of feature specification from (23) to (28) made it possible that [Spec, AgrP] and [Spec, TP] were utilized simultaneously, thus accounting for the rise of TECs: (30) iAprP there LAgr™ Agr[nominal] [TP SUB, [T T [vp ti OB J]]]] In (30), the indefinite subject raises overtly to [Spec, TP] to enter into a checking relation with the Nominative Case feature of T; there is merged to [Spec, AgrP] to satisfy [nominal]. With the assumption that there was a change of feature specifica- tion from (23) to (28), we can thus account for the fact that the rise of TECs roughly coincided with the decline of subject clitics (which began in the second half of the fourteenth century) in the history of English. It should be stressed here that the change of feature specification was not a rapid but gradual one, which began during the fourteenth century and completed in the early fifteenth century. According to Van Kemenade (1987), in the fourteenth century prose texts writtten by Richard Rolle (c1340), nominal subjects could be either pre- ceded or followed by the finite verb in topic-initial main clauses, as shown in (31): (31) a. bus callis oure Lorde chosen saules in haly writt thus calls our lord (to) chosen souls in holy writ (RR 46. 35 / Van Kemenade, 1987: 182) b. sothely be ryghtwyse sekys be Ioye truly the righteous seeks the joy (RR 4. 24 / Van Kemenade, 1987: 182) This fact suggests that both feature specifications in (23) and (28) were available in the fourteenth century which was a transitional period. The availability of the speci- T. Tanaku I Lingua 110 (2000) 4731195 491 fication in (28) is also supported by the presence of TECs in Richard Rolle™s writ- ings, as illustrated in (32)?O (32) her may no saule fele verreyly Aungells sange ne heuenly sown there may no soul feel really angel™s song nor heavenly sound (RR 17. 34 / Helsinki Corpus) This is a sort of situation described as ‚grammatical competition™ in the sense of Kroch (1989), where two grammatical options are synchronically available in a tran- sitional period. The clause structure with the feature specification as in (28) survived till the end of Middle English; consequently, TECs were attested during Late Middle English by virtue of two VP-external subject positions. Then, verbal morphology was reduced by the beginning of the sixteenth century to the extent that there was no longer any evidence for postulating the clause structure with both Agr and T. As we saw in sec- tion 2, English therefore came to have the clause structure with only one I-type func- tional category during the sixteenth century, which led to the loss of TECs since [Spec, IP] became the only subject position available outside VP:*™ (33) A Spec A I VP [nominal] 2o The same is also true of the writings of Wycliffe (~1380). I have found two potential examples of TECs in searching for Wycliffe™s quotations in OED 2 on CD-ROM, pointing to the feature specifica- tion in (28): (i) her may no man dispense with hem of bat boonde there may no man dispense with them of that bond (Wycl. Wks. 390 / OED) On the other hand, Van Kemenade (1987) observes that besides the word order pattern in (21a), a nom- inal subject could be preceded by the finite verb in the writings of Wycliffe, which indicate that the older specification in (23) was still available: (i) herefore ben many proude lorelis founden for this reason are many proud worthless persons found (Wycl. FCL 140 /Van Kemenade, 1987: 182) 2™ Bobaljik (1995), Bobaljik and Thrainsson (1998) and Thrainsson (1996) argue that only languages which have the clause structure with both Agr and T allow overt verb movement and Object Shift of full DPs, in addition to TECs. Therefore, it would be interesting to pay attention to the period when these two phenomena were lost in the history of English. First, it is standardly assumed that overt verb move- ment was lost in the sixteenth century (Roberts, 1993; Rohrbacher, 1999; Vikner, 1997). Second, Van der Wurff (1997) argues that object-verb orders sometimes found in Late Middle English were derived by Object Shift, and they became obsolete in the sixteenth century (see also Van der Wurff and Foster, 1997). Whatever accounts for the correlation between the clause structure with both Agr and T and the availability of these two phenomena, these historical facts are compatible with the conclusion in the text that there was a change of clause structure in the sixteenth century, which led to the situation in Present- day English that there is only one I-type functional category. 492 T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473495 5. Conclusion: Against the multiple specifier analysis of TECs This paper has attempted to account for the development of TECs in the history of English in terms of the changes of clause structure and feature specifications on functional heads. First, a consideration of the relationship between verbal morphol- ogy and clause structure led to the hypothesis that Old and Middle English had the clause structure with both Agr and T, but the loss of ‚rich™ verbal morphology forced the postulation of the clause structure with only one I-type functional category dur- ing the sixteenth century. Next, having demonstrated that TECs observed in Late Middle English/Early Modem English were syntactically parallel to those observed in some of the modem Germanic languages, it was argued that the decline of subject clitics in the fourteenth century triggered the change of feature specifications on Agr and T. This change made it possible that two VP-external subject positions were uti- lized simultaneously, thereby giving rise to TECs in the fourteenth century. Then, the loss of TECs in the sixteenth century was accounted for as a consequence of the change of clause structure just mentioned, which led eventually to the situation in Present-day English that there is only one subject position available outside VP. Finally, some comments are in order with respect to the multiple specifier analy- sis of TECs proposed by Chomsky (1995). Chomsky proposes to eliminate Agr alto- gether, on the ground that it consists of only uninterpretable features and hence should have no functions at the interface levels. In this spirit, he presents an altema- tive analysis of TECs which does not resort to Agr, according to which both there and the indefinite subject appear in [Spec, TP], as schematized in (34): (34) [rP there [r, SUBi [r T[nominall [vp ti OB I]]] He argues that TECs are only allowed in languages which can make use of so-called ‚multiple specifiers™ at the level of TP. Under his analysis, those languages have the parametric option which allows the strong [nominal] of T to escape deletion when checked. As correctly pointed out by Jonas (1996), Thrainsson (1996), and Zwart (1997) Chomsky™s multiple specifier analysis would predict that TECs exhibit the word order as in (34) where the indefinite subject is located between there and the finite verb, which is contrary to the fact. Chomsky indeed notices this problem and sug- gests the possibility that the observed order (there-Vf-subject) is formed by some operations in the phonological component which derive the effect of verb second, and that the order in (34) is maintained through the computation which proceeds to LF. In light of the results obtained in this paper, however, his analysis raises a num- ber of serious problems. First, TECs in Late Middle English/Early Modem English were observed with the order there-Vf-subject in embedded clauses which are not subject to the verb second constraint, as we saw in (14). In fact, it seems that verb second did not play any important role in allowing for TECs in the history of Eng- lish, because verb second began to decline in the second half of the fourteenth cen- tury (Van Kemenade, 1987, 1997; see 21 and 31b), when TECs came to be fre- quently observed. Second, if it were to account for the development of TECs in the T. Tanaka I Lingua 110 (2000) 473-495 493 history of English, Chomsky™s analysis would require an otherwise unmotivated parametric change in which multiple specifiers were only available from the four- teenth to sixteenth century. Furthermore, it is unclear how his analysis accommo- dates the crosslinguistic correlation between ‚rich™ verbal morphology and the avail- ability of TECs as pointed out in section 2. Thus, Chomsky™s (1995) multiple specifier analysis, which is only motivated from theoretical considerations, poses a number of empirical problems. Then, the only remaining problem with the current analysis which makes use of Agr is a conceptual one: is it plausible to postulate Agr, which Chomsky (1995) argues has no functions at the interface levels? In the criticism of Chomsky™s multi- ple specifier analysis, Zwart (1997) argues that Agr does have functions at PF and LF, and hence there is a conceptual necessity of postulating Agr. Although a detailed evaluation of Zwart™s arguments is beyond the scope of this paper, it is worthwhile to address his argument for PF functions of Agr. According to Zwart, Agr does play active roles at PF in determining the inflected form of a verb (which moves to Agr and gets spelled out as a combination V + Agr). Taking this argument together with the discussion in section 2 on the relationship between ‚rich™ verbal morphology and clause structure, it might be suggested that Agr must be postulated at least for lan- guages where tense and agreement morphemes appear simultaneously, because it plays active roles in checking off agreement features on the verb in narrow syntax and determining its inflected form at PF. If this argument is on the right track, there is a conceptual neccessity of postulating Agr at least for some languages, lending conceptual support to the current analysis of TECs. References Alexiadou, A. and E. Anagnostopoulou, 1998. Parameterizing AGR: word order, V-movement and EPP checking. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 16, 491-539. Araki, K. and M. Ukaji, 1984. History of English IIIA. Tokyo: Taishukan. Barber, C., 1997. Early Modem English. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. Bobaljik, J.D., 1995. Morphosyntax: The syntax of verbal inflection. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT. Bobaljik, J.D. and D. Jonas, 1996. Subject positions and the roles of TP. Linguistic Inquiry 27, 195-236. Bobaljik, J.D. and H. Thrainsson, 1998. Two heads aren™t always better than one. Syntax 1, 37-71. Bolinger, D., 1977. Meaning and form. London: Longman. Breivik, L.E., 1983. Existential THERE: A synchronic and diachronic study. Bergen: University of Bergen. Bures, A., 1993. There is an argument for an LF cycle here. CLS 28, 14-35. Cardinaletti, A. and M. Starke, 1994. The typology of structural deficiency: On three grammatical cases. Ms., University of Venice and University of Geneva/Max Planck Berlin. Chomsky, N., 1995. The minimalist program. Cambrige, MA.: MIT Press, Chomsky, N., 1998. Minimalist inquiries: The framework. Ms., MIT. Golarch, M., 1991. Introduction to Early Modem English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Holmberg, A. and C. Platzack, 1995. The role of inflection in Scandinavian syntax. Oxford: Oxford Uni- versity Press. Hulk, A. and A. van Kemenade, 1997. Negation as a reflex of clause structure. In: D. Forget, P. Hirschbtihler, F. Martineau (eds.), Negation and polarity: syntax and semantics, 183-207. Amster- dam: Benjamins. 494 T. Tanaka ILingua 110 (2000)473-d95 Ishikawa, K., 1995. A history of not: The change from a phrase to a head. English Linguistics 12, 197-221. Ishikawa, K., 1997. The survival and the demise of ‚object + verb™ order in English: an analysis under the Minimalist approach. Studies in Modem English 13, 17-35. Jacobsson, B., 1951. Inversion in English: With special reference to the Early Modem English Period. Uppsala: Almqvist and Wiksells. Jonas, D., 1996. Clause structure and verbal syntax in Scandinavian and English. Ph.D. dissertation, Har- vard University. Kayne, R.S., 1979. Rightward NP movement in French and English. Linguistic Inquiry 10, 710-719. Kemenade, A. van, 1987. Syntactic case and morphological case in the history of English. Dordrecht: Foris. Kemenade, A. van, 1992. Structural factors in the history of English modals. In: M. Rissanen, 0. Iha- lainen, T. Nevalainen, I. Taavitsainen (eds.), History of Englishes: New methods and interpretations in historical linguistics, 287-309. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Kemenade, A. van, 1997. V2 and embedded topicalization in Old and Middle English. In: A. van Keme- nade, N. Vincent (eds.), Parameters of morphosyntactic change, 326352. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Kiparsky, P., 1995. The Indo-European origins of Germanic syntax. In: A. Battye, I. Roberts (eds.), Clause structure and language change, 140-170. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Koopman, W., 1995. Verb-final main clauses in Old English prose. Studia Neophilologica 67, 129-144. Koopman, W., 1998. Inversion after single and multiple topics in Old English. In: J. Fisiak (ed.), Advances in English historical syntax, 135-l 50. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Kroch, A.S., 1989. Reflexes of grammar in patterns of language change. Language Variation and Change I, 199-244. Kroch, A.S. and A. Taylor, 1997. Verb movement in Old and Middle English: dialect variation and lan- guage contact, In: A. van Kemenade, N. Vincent (eds.), parameters of morphosyntactic change, 297-325. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Laentzlinger, C., 1998. Comparative studies in word order variation: Adverbs, pronouns, and clause structure in Romance and Germanic. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Levin, B., 1993. English verb classes and alternations: A preliminary investigation. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press. McCloskey, J., 1996. Subjects and subject positions in Irish. In: R. Borsley, I. Roberts (eds.), The syntax of the Celtic languages: A comparative perspective, 241-283. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. McCloskey, J., 1997. Subjecthood and subject positions. In: L. Haegeman (ed.), Elements of grammar, 197-235. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Mitchell. B. and F.C. Robinson, 1992. A guide to Old English: A fifth edition. Oxford: Blackwell. Moss& F., 1952. Handbook of Middle English. Baltimore, MD: The John Hopkins Press. Nakao, T., 1972. History of English II. Tokyo: Taishukan. Ono, S. and T. Nakao, 1980. History of English I. Tokyo: Taishukan. Pintzuk, S., 1991. Phrase structures in competition: Variation and change in Old English word order. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania. Pyles, T., 1964. The origins and development of the English language. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Rizzi, L., 1996. Residual verb second and the wh-criterion. In: A. Belletti, L. Rizzi (eds.), Parameters and functional heads: Essays in comparative syntax, 63-90. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Roberts, I., 1993. Verbs and diachronic syntax: A comparative study of English and French. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Roberts, I., 1995. Object movement and verb movement in Early Modem English. In: H. Haider, S. Olsen, S. Vikner (eds.), Studies in comparative Germanic syntax, 269-284. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Roberts, I., 1997. Directionality and word order change in the history of English. In: A. van Kemenade, N. Vincent (eds.), Parameters of morphosyntactic change, 397426. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer- sity Press. Rohrbacher, B.W., 1999. Morphology-driven syntax: A theory of V to I raising and pro-drop. Amster- dam: Benjamins. T. Tanaka I Lingua I10 (2000) 473495 495 Sigu&son, H., 1991. Icelandic case-marked PRO and the licensing of lexical arguments. Natural Lan- guage and Linguistic Theory 9, 327-365. Sportiche, D., 1998. Partitions and atoms of clause structure: Subjects, agreement, case and clitics. Lon- don: Routledge. Strang, B., 1970. A history of English. London: Methuen. Tanaka, T., 1999. The position of subjects in passive expletive constructions: An overview of some his- torical data. English Studies 30, 87-111. Tokyo: Tokyo Gakugei University. Thrainsson, H., 1996. On the (non-)universality of functional categories. In: W. Abraham, S.D. Epstein, H. Thrainsson, J.-W. Zwart (eds.), Minimal ideas: Syntactic studies in the minimalist framework, 253-281. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Uriagereka, J., 1995. Aspects of the syntax of clitic placement in Western Romance. Linguistic Inquiry 26,79-124. Vikner, S., 1995. Verb movement and expletive subjects in the Germanic languages. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Vikner, S., 1997. Vﬂ-to-I0 movement and inflection for person in all tenses. In: L. Haegeman (ed.), The new comparative syntax, 189-2 13. London: Longman. Visser, F., 1963. An historical syntax of the English language, vol. I. Leiden: Brill. Warner, A., 1982. Complementation in Middle English and the methodology of historical syntax. Lon- don: Croom Helm. Warner, A., 1993. English auxiliaries: structure and history. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Wurff, W. van der, 1997. Deriving object-verb order in Late Middle English. Journal of Linguistics 33, 485-509. Wurff, van der W. and T. Foster., 1997. Object-verb order in 16th century English: a study of its fre- quency and status. In: R. Hickey, S. Puppel (eds.), Language history and linguistic modelling: A festschrift for Jack Fisiak on his 60th birthday, vol. I, 439453. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Zwart. J.-W., 1997. Transitive expletive constructions and the evidence supporting the multiple specifier hypothesis. In: W. Abraham, E. van Gelderen (eds.), German: syntactic problems - problematic syn- tax, 105-134. Ttibingen: Niemeyer. 