__ l!fz ELSEVIER Lingua 110(2000)497-502 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Book review Peter Trudgill and Jenny Cheshire (eds.), The sociolinguistics reader volume I: Multilingualism and variation. London: Arnold, 1998. vii + 283 pp. c15.99 (pb.). Jenny Cheshire and Peter Trudgill (eds.), The sociolinguistics reader volume 2: Gender and discourse. London: Arnold, 1998. vii + 403 pp. c17.99 (pb.). Reviewed by Graeme Trousdale, Department of English Language, University of Edinburgh, David Hume Tower, George Square, Edinburgh, Scotland EH8 9JX, UK. E-mail: Graeme.Trousdale@ed.ac.uk In their introduction, Peter Trudgill and Jenny Cheshire detail the two broad aims of this reader: to serve as a teaching resource, providing students and teachers with access to recent research papers (post-1986) in four main areas of sociolinguistics (multilingualism and language contact; linguistic variation and change; gender; and discourse); and to act as an account of the stage of development of the sociolinguis- tic enterprise at the end of the twentieth century. In order to accomplish this monu- mental task, the editors asked a number of leading scholars within the field of soci- olinguistics to detail which papers they themselves recommended most frequently to their students. The product of this endeavour is a superb reader, with twenty-eight papers which reflect the extensive scope of sociolinguistic research. The editors have written intro- ductions to each of the four sections which cover the areas mentioned above, includ- ing synopses of the arguments of each of the seven papers in that section. At the end of these introductory passages, the editors provide readers with a range of textbooks within the specific subject area, and a list of journals which publish papers on simi- lar themes. At the end of each volume, they provide an index of subjects covered. The first section of volume 1 comprises seven papers on the subject of the soci- olinguistics of languages (and dialects) in contact. The first and second papers are examples of research in applied sociolinguistics. The first (pp. 5-24), by Christine Beal, examines the variation in request strategies between Australian English speak- ers and their English-speaking French co-workers at an Australian branch of a French-based multinational company. The paper considers variation in the formula- tion of requests and directives in light of politeness theory, and finds that in some cases where mastery of L2 (here English) is weak, certain linguistic and pragmatic features of Ll (French) are transferred directly to L2, which could give an impres- sion of brusqueness or flippancy. BCal concludes by suggesting that a greater aware- 0378.2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PI: SOO24-3841(99)00050-9 498 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 497-502 ness of the sociolinguistic issues involved - particularly in terms of the employer™s attitude - might bring about greater understanding of the problems faced by L2 speakers in such situations. Cecilia Roberts and Pete Sayers™ paper (pp. 25~l3) also deals with the application of sociolinguistic phenomena to the world of business, focusing on the relationship between ethnic-based variation in English and the lan- guage of job and training interviews, particularly in the light of an increasing attempt to promote equal opportunities to minority groups. The authors consider knowledge of such variation to be of particular importance to those conducting such interviews in various employment and training organisations. The third paper, by Shana Poplack (pp. 44-65), is on the patterns of code-switch- ing found in two North American communities. The first concerns bilingual Puerto Ricans in New York, and the second concerns switches between French and English in the Ottowa-Hull conurbation in Canada. Poplack investigates the general nature of syntactic and morphological constraints which characterise the patterns of code- switching derivable from the data, but more specifically highlights differences between the two communities in terms of the function of the switch. Ottowa-Hull informants mark switch points through hesitation and metalinguistic commentary, while Puerto Rican informants attempt to downgrade such switches (though Poplack does note that the methodology used in each study was not the same, which may have affected the results). Emphasis is placed on the need to ‚look locally™, to under- stand the practices of specific communities, in any investigation into contact phe- nomena. Robert LePage™s paper (pp. 66-89) brings together certain findings from creolist studies carried out over a number of years in Belize and St. Lucia, presenting a gen- eral framework for contact phenomena alongside detailed analyses of specific creole structures. Like Milroy (1987), LePage draws attention to the importance of social networks for the propagation and fossilisation of certain variants. Barbara Horvath, in her paper on ethnic variation in inner-city Sydney English (pp. 90-102), illustrates sociolinguistic patterns in the use of vocalic variants in Cul- tivated, General, Broad and Ethnic Broad Australian English, specifically examining variation in the degree of integration of the various ethnic groups (Anglo, Italian and Greek) between two generations. Peter Trudgill™s paper (pp. 103-l 12) examines variation in verbal morphology in East Anglia from a dialect contact perspective, attempting to investigate why expected patterns of hypercorrection do not seem to appear in the data collected by him in various studies since the 1970s. He argues that the ‚zero™ variant of the third person singular present tense morph (e.g. he love as opposed to standard English he loves) appeared in Norwich English as a result of migration into the East Anglian region of a group of European, specifically Low Country, refugees in the early Mod- em English period, who were using a simplified morphological paradigm for present tense verbs. The introduction of this form was roughly simultaneous with the diffu- sion of the northern (S) inflection to the area, and both of these were contrasting with the southern (~0) form. Trudgill concludes by arguing that reallocation of vari- ants in contact situations ﬁmay result in the redistribution of variants according to social class dialectsﬂ (p. 111). Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 497-502 499 The final paper in this section, by Susan Gal (pp. 113-121) is the only one which deals entirely with non-English data, and concerns the use of German by bilingual Hungarians. It deals with issues of language ideology, and the social and economic advantages and disadvantages of using German in the Hungarian town of Boly. The second section of the first volume comprises seven papers on what the editors consider ‚the most obviously linguistic form of sociolinguistics™ (p. 123) namely linguistic variation and change. Jenny Cheshire™s paper on never as a marker of negation in English (pp. 127-144) begins by sketching the diachronic development of the form, including some comment on prescripitivist reaction to its usage. By con- centrating her analysis on the function of never in interaction, Cheshire suggests that the time-reference of the form is fixed by context and by the addressee: an utterance such as Shinfield never come down here is, in isolation, ambiguous (given that come is a vernacular past tense form of COME) between never = ‚not on any occasion™ and never = ‚not on one specific occasion™. She stresses the need for a more com- prehensive approach to syntactic analysis, which can potentially be achieved by con- sidering the use of forms in their discourse context. J.K. Chambers™ paper (pp. 145-178) proposes eight principles of dialect acquisi- tion based on data collected from a comparison of 6 adolescent Canadian immigrants to southern England with 6 native contemporaries. These principles consider patterns of lexical and phonological acquisition, and patterns of age-graded acquisition, alongside variation in the adoption and elimination of variable and categorical rules by natives and adopters, and the role of orthography in determining the rate of adop- tion. James and Lesley Milroy™s paper on the intersection of gender, class and network in the promotion of and resistance to linguistic change (pp. 179-195) challenges the (traditional) view that class differences are primary to gender differences, that the latter are dependent on the former. Their evidence comes from a range of surveys in Northern Ireland and Newcastle upon Tyne, and the results suggest that an integrated approach - which considers how a number of social variables are interrelated - might best account for patterns of structured linguistic variation. The next paper, by Gregory R. Guy and Sally Boyd (pp. 196-212), examines pat- terns of variation in the acquisition of morphological categories in the English ver- bal system, particularly the so-called ‚semi-weak™ verbs, which in the formation of their past tense display both root modification and suffixation (e.g. dream - dreamt). The data was drawn from a collection of material collected by Labov and his asso- ciates for the Linguistic Variation and Change project at the University of Pennsyl- vania. The authors show that children initially assign such verbs to the ‚strong™ class, with categorical absence of suffixation; the next stage involves variable suffixation, though not of a type that is isomorphic with the regular weak verb pattern, and this stage is reached by late adolescence; and the final stage - not acquired by all speak- ers - is the formulation of the semi-weak verbs as a separate morphological class. Variation and change in the high rising terminal contour (HRT) in New Zealand English (NZE) is the subject of David Britain™s paper (pp. 213-240). Britain shows that HRTs in NZE often function as markers of positive politeness, and the research concerns the relationship between use of HRTs and a range of social variables 500 Book review ILingua 110 (2000) 497-502 (including gender, ethnicity, and class). The results indicate a change in progress in the use of HRTs: they are becoming more frequent in the speech of younger new Zealanders, and particularly in the speech of Pakeha women (of European descent) and Maori, who use HRTs as markers of speaker-listener solidarity. Guy Bailey and Natalie Maynor consider the development of present tense be in Black English Vernacular (BEV) - or African American Vernacular English (AAVE) as it is now known - in their paper (pp. 240-262) based on the speech of 27 East Texan informants. They consider the influence of both social variation and syntactic constraints on the occurrence of the linguistic variants, and challenge the idea that AAVE is simply decreolising. Indeed, their evidence suggests that a syn- tactic reanalysis has taken place independently of contact with the standard variety (given that the change is away from, rather than toward, the standard). This linguis- tic variation is tied to a variety of social factors, not least of which is the isolation of many AAVE speech communities which engage in only ‚marginal interaction™ (p. 256) with whites. The final paper in this section concerns the linguistic consequences of language planning, and is written by Ernst Hakon Jahr (pp. 263-275). Taking data from spo- ken Norwegian and Icelandic, Jahr considers the sociolinguistic ramifications of change which is consciously implemented by various political and administrative bodies, concentrating on the diffusion of such changes, and the extent to which other factors may contribute to the overall success of the implementation. The second volume considers gender in its first section, and opens with a paper (pp. 7-52) by William Labov, on the relationship between sex and class in the devel- opment of linguistic changes, attempting to test a set of principles against data col- lected from a set of Philadelphian informants. The research investigates the validity of the claim that (a) women lead in linguistic changes (from above and below) and (b) men use a greater number of non-standard variants of stable variables than women do. Labov considers the correlation of class and sex differentiation with a number of vocalic variables undergoing change, some of which are new and vigor- ous, and others which are old and nearing completion. As in the paper by the Mil- roys in volume one, Labov promotes the importance of considering a range of fac- tors which might be seen to influence the development of specific changes. Robert K. Herbert™s paper (pp. 53-75) investigates sex-based variation in the struc- ture of compliments in American English, examining such variation in the light of politeness theory and discourse structure. Amy Sheldon and Diane Johnson, in their paper on the construction of gender in children™s disputes (pp. 76-98) show how conflict talk in American English ﬁreflects and perpetuates a cultural ideology which constrains girls and women from engaging in direct or confrontational talk, but which permits and encourages boys and men to do soﬂ (p. 79). Candace West, in her paper (pp. 99-126) examines reactions of patients from the American South to orders given by male and female doctors. She investigates variation in the form of the direc- tive uttered by physicians, suggesting that male doctors emphasise distance between themselves and their patients while female doctors emphasise solidarity. Gossip in all female groups is the subject of Jennifer Coates™ research paper (pp. 127-152). This research addresses the issue of the function of gossip in women™s speech, sug- Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 497-502 501 gesting that its chief goal is the ‚maintenance of good social relationships™ (p. 130) and that it promotes co-operativeness between the participants. Issues such as tum- taking and minimal responses are considered, and Coates illustrates specific discourse patterns of female speech in this regard. Suzanne Giinthner™s paper (pp. 153-177) addresses the construction of gender in the language of Chinese students and their German counsellors at university. Gtinthner shows how gender is constructed in interaction, but also how gender interacts with other social constructs, and how this interaction also shapes discourse patterns. Finally in this section, Susan Ehrlich and Ruth King consider certain aspects of sexist language and language reform, specifi- cally how certain words and phrases associated with sexism and feminism undergo a semantic shift as they are reinterpreted in the larger speech community. Their paper specifically considers how the (mis)use of language can aid the perpetuation of sex- ism in society. The final section of the reader contains seven papers on the topic of discourse. The first, by Janet Holmes (pp. 201-239), considers characteristics of apologies in informal NZE in the light of politeness theory (and in this way partners Herbert™s paper in the gender section of this volume), examining a range of formal strategies used to apologise. Holmes™ research indicates that apologies ﬁappear to draw on a very narrow range of syntactic patterns and high frequency lexical itemsﬂ (p, 217). In attempting to define a sociolinguistic pattern for the variation in apology form, Holmes refers to Wolfson™s (1988) ‚bulge theory™ of interaction: speakers at either extreme of social distance (basically strangers and intimates) seem to show similar interactive patterns which contrast with those at the centre. Suzanne Romaine and Deborah Lange™s paper on the grammaticalisation of like as a marker of reported speech or thought in American English (pp. 240-277) con- siders the increased use of like in constructions such as ‚A man came up to me and said, ﬁYou really look like Princess Di.ﬂ And he looked at me and he™s LIKE, ﬁAre you?ﬁ™ (p. 240). Romaine and Lange suggest this is a change in progress, with such constructions being particularly favoured by adolescents, specifically female adolescents. They show (p. 247) that one of the functions of be + like (as opposed to other verbs of saying) is to demarcate the role of speaker from that of others in the (reported) discourse. Drawing on the work of Traugott (1982), the authors argue that the grammaticalisation of like is part of a semantic/pragmatic process in which a marker in the ‚propositional™ component of the grammar is extended to the textual component with a new function (here, a quotative comple- mentizer). Janet Maybin™s article (pp. 278-294) considers the role of discourse in an educa- tional context, basing its arguments on data collected from a number of British schoolchildren. She shows how a number of tasks in the classroom are achieved through negotiated discourse, both between the children themselves and between chil- dren and adults, highlighting the multi-functional nature of utterances, and the collab- orative nature of children™s talk. She concludes by relating her findings to the wider issue of educational policy. In a similar way, James Paul Gee™s article (pp. 295-314) examines how literacy and the role of the school can influence the construction of narrative in the speech of two American children. Gee illustrates how texts - and 502 Book review I Lingua 1 IO (2000) 497-502 idea units within the texts - can be organised into ‚lines™ and ‚stanzas™, and how such units function in the discourse as a whole. Michael Clyne™s paper (pp. 3 15-347) examines differences in discourse structures in the writings of German-speaking and English-speaking academics, and shows how such differences are a reflection of different expectations of the reader in the two cultures, and how the differences may form a barrier for the exchange of infor- mation between the two cultures. The penultimate paper, by Michael Stubbs (pp. 348-366), discusses the discourse structures in the speech of a judge summing up a case to a jury, and considers the extent to which such structures might influence the outcome of the trial. It examines the role of syntactic complexity, modal verb usage and particular lexical items in the overall discourse structure of the judge™s final speech, and how ‚language mediates our understanding of past events™ in the courtroom (p. 365). The final paper in the reader is by Teun A. van Dijk (pp. 367-393) and investi- gates the principles of critical discourse analysis through discussion of a speech made by an MP on the issue of multiculturalism and racism in schools. Van Dijk™s meticulous analysis shows how an understanding of discourse structure - the organ- isation of language, in addition to the meanings of words themselves - can be used to illustrate the propagation of inequality in a given social or political context. Clearly these summaries do not do justice to the range of issues considered in each of the research papers: they are intended merely to provide a synopsis of what seemed to me to be the most important findings. Nor have I wanted to impose my views on the content of these papers: I have simply tried to provide as full an account as possible of the vast range of topics which are contained within these two volumes, as it is this range which is one of the major strengths of the reader. It should appeal to anyone interested in the relationship between language and society, no matter where individual specialisms or teaching interests lie. The editors should be warmly congratulated for providing such a well-balanced selection of first-rate research papers in this reader, which will no doubt prove to be an excellent resource for student and teacher alike. References Milroy, L., 1987. Language and social networks. Second edition. Oxford: Blackwell. Traugott, E.C., 1982. From propositional to textual and expressive meanings: Some semantic-pragmatic aspects of grammaticalisation. In: W.P. Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds.), Perspectives on historical linguistics, 245-27 1. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Wolfson, N., 1988. The bulge: A theory of speech behaviour and social distance. In: J. Fine (ed.), Sec- ond language discourse: A textbook of current research, 21-38. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 