ELSEVlER Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Irony: Negation, echo and metarepresentation* Carmen Curc6* Department of Applied Linguistics, CELE, UNAM. Circuit0 Interior s/n, Ciudad Universifaria, 04510 Mtkico DF, Mexico Received 15 June 1999; revised version 1 September 1999 Abstract There is a current debate on the nature of verbal irony. On one view, held by Sperber and Wilson (1981, 1986; Wilson and Sperber, 1992), verbal irony is a subtype of echoic use of language. On another view, advocated by Giora (1995, Giora and Fein, 1998), verbal irony is a form of indirect negation. This paper compares both approaches and looks at their predic- tions with regard to the cognitive abilities that the processing of verbal irony should demand. In particular, it concentrates on the degree of higher-order mental representations that inter- preters of verbal irony should be able to manipulate. The results of the analysis favour the framework proposed by Sperber and Wilson. 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Verbal irony; Meta-representation; Indirect negation; Echoic use; Theory of mind 1. Introduction The literature on irony and its interpretation is very extensive. In this paper I con- centrate on two current views on the pragmatic nature of verbal irony: one that sees irony as a subtype of echoic use of language (Sperber and Wilson, 1981,1986; Wil- son and Sperber, 1992), and one that suggests irony is a form of indirect negation (Giora, 1995). I contrast them looking both at their descriptive and their explanatory power. I offer some critical thoughts about the analysis of irony as negation, in par- ticular, with regard to the implications it would have for the processing of verbal * I am grateful to Marilyn Buck and an anonymous reviewer for their very valuable comments on a previous version of this paper. * E-mail: carmenc@servidor.unam.mx 037%2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(99)00041-8 258 C. Cum5 I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 irony and the manipulation of mental metarepresentations, and I make an attempt to clarify the similarities and differences between the two approaches. 2. The general picture Giora (1995) has recently suggested that irony is a form of indirect negation. The idea that negation is somehow involved in irony is not particularly new. The rhetor- ical tradition always treated irony as the figure of speech in which the figurative meaning is the opposite of the literal meaning, so that an ironist™s primary intention is to communicate the opposite of what he says, and hence, in a way, to deny the proposition expressed by his utterance.™ Modem Gricean pragmatic theory has not departed radically from this view. While it has offered an account of how the speaker™s intended meaning can be recognized, a question not addressed by the rhetorical tradition, it has adhered to the belief that the speaker™s intended meaning is the opposite of what his utterance says. What in classical rhetoric was treated as figurative meaning is, in Gricean terms, an implicature, but the link between irony and negation is preserved. More recently, Martin (1992) has claimed that negation is always involved in irony, although not in the way authors in the rhetorical tradition, Grice and Searle, originally thought. Martin points out that an ironist often says something false in order to suggest something true, and that even when an ironic speaker tells the truth, in being ironic he says something true in order to reveal some- thing false. In all cases, he argues, there is some reversal of meaning which justifies the parallel drawn between irony and negation.2 In this general picture, what is new, then, about Giora™s suggestion? First, she has added some precision to the common association between irony and negation by attempting to spell out the exact type of negation involved in irony. She denies, along with Martin, that ironic utterances necessarily communicate the oppo- site of what they say. What they do, Giora suggests, is to indirectly negate the propo- sitional content expressed.3 Second, Giora has tried to work out the consequences of r For an interesting view about the rhetorical model and its influence on contemporary work on irony see Stringfellow (1994) and references therein. z Martin stresses that the type of negation at stake in irony is otten contrary negation and not neces- sarily contradictory negation. 3 She finds support for her view in a number of similarities between irony and indict negation. Indi- rect negation avoids some of the effects of direct negation. For instance, she argues, consider the direct negation of a scalar term. When a member of a set is directly negated, the rest can take over (so that ‚not hot™ means ‚less than hot™, rather than ‚cold™; and ‚not warm™ may mean ‚hot™ or ‚cold™ or ‚neither warm nor cool™). She believes this effect does not take place in verbal irony. Consider a situation in which we go to a beach on holiday, looking forward to a week of hot weather by the sea. In fact, we fmd hurri- canes and bad weather all along. Someone says ironically ‚It™s hot™. If all possible interpretations are placed on a scale and we think of the proposition expressed as being indirectly negated, then it is not the most distant interpretation on the scale that is suggested by the use of irony, but neither is an approxi- mate one. The meaning conveyed, she would argue, is not ‚It™s less than hot™. Also, indimct negation avoids the psychologically marked nature of direct negation, revealed by the processing difficulty induced by explicit negation, and an alleged ‚unpleasant hedonic value™ usually attached to overt nega- tion (Wason and Jones, 1963, cited by Giora, 1995). C. Cured I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 259 viewing irony as an indirect form of negation for our understanding of how ironic discourse is processed, and she has conducted experimental research to support her approach (Giora and Fein, 1998). On the issue of processing, she reacts against Grice (1975) and Clark and Gerrig (1984) because she sees their proposals as leading to the conclusion that interpreting irony involves abandoning the proposition expressed by the utterance. In other words, the interpreter is seen as canceling what she calls the indirectly negated message and replacing it with the implicated one. Instead, she argues that in interpreting verbal irony the literal meaning of an ironic utterance is retained, and suggests that ﬁirony understanding involves processing both the negated and implicated messages so that the difference between them may be com- putedﬂ (Giora, 1995: 239). Third, Giora has revived the notion of negation to explain irony after such a tendency seemed almost gone, at least within the fields of linguistics, psychology and philosophy of language.4 Views of irony as a form of negation were popular before alternative accounts were put forward. But in the 198Os, however, Sperber and Wilson proposed to treat irony as a variety of implicit echoic use (Sperber and Wilson, 1981, 1986), while Clark and Gerrig (1984) sug- gested viewing verbal irony as a mode of pretense, and Kreuz and Glucksberg (1989) analyzed it as an echoic reminder. Whether or not the pretense and the echoic reminder views of irony are substantially different from the relevance theoretic approach (Sperber and Wilson, 1981, 1986; Wilson and Sperber, 1992) is a separate issue.5 The point is that approaches based on the notion of negation became less pop- ular after such developments. 6 Giora also attempts to show that Sperber and Wil- son™s approach is inadequate. She claims that verbal irony is not necessarily echoic, and also that several utterances that do fit Sperber and Wilson™s description of irony fail to be ironic, hence she concludes that Sperber and Wilson™s conditions on irony are not sufficient to characterize it either. If it is true that the views proposed by Clark and Gerrig (1984) and Kreuz and Glucksberg (1989) are very close to Sperber and Wilson™s framework, then Giora™s attack would affect the whole spectrum of proposals denying the parallel between irony and negation. The three reasons I have mentioned raise an interest in looking at her approach in detail. Let me first describe how Giora places her account within current research on irony and irony comprehension. On her general characterization of irony, Giora sees herself keeping company with Grice (1975), Searle (1979), and Martin (1992): they all view irony as involving some form of negation. So, as already mentioned, she rejects alternative accounts, in particular, the one proposed within relevance theory which suggests that irony is a variety of implicit echoic interpretive use, in which the communicator dissociates herself from the opinion echoed (Wilson and Sperber, 1992). 4 However, see Stringfellow (1994) and Dubois (1981) for an account of how Group p has brought up the Freudian concept of ‚negation™ in their discussion of irony and related tropes. 5 It can be argued that Clark and Gerrig (and Kreuz and Cluck&erg) have simpy recast Sperber and Wilson™s ideas, but this issue is beyond the scope of this paper. 6 But see Martin 1992 for an attempt to fit irony, characterized as a form of negation, within a seman- tico-logical framework based on universes of belief. 260 C. Cured I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 At the level of processing, and with regard to the time course of understanding irony, Giora sees current research as falling within one of two positions, each of which, she argues, holds three tenets: (a) understanding irony is a one-stage process, irony shouldn™t be any more difficult to process than literal language, and it shouldn™t take longer to understand; and (b) understanding irony is a two-stage process, irony is more difficult to process than literal language, and it takes longer to understand. Under the first position she places pragmatists such as Sperber and Wilson (1986; Wilson and Sperber, 1992), apparently because they have argued that the process of understanding literal and nonliteral language is ruled by one single principle: the search for an interpretation consistent with the Principle of Relevance and, therefore, they maintain that figurative language does not deviate from standard communica- tive norms. Cognitive psychologists such as Gibbs (1986a,b, 1994), Gibbs and Ger- rig (1989), and Gibbs and O™Brien (1991) are also seen by Giora as belonging to this tradition because their experiments have shown that irony does not take longer to understand than nonironic statements, and they have hence concluded that irony is no more difficult to understand than nonironic expressions. Jorgensen et al. (1984) are also included here because in their experiments they have adopted Sperber and Wilson™s view, which denies that ﬁto speak ironically is to express a figurative meaning that is the opposite of the literal meaningﬂ and that to ﬁto comprehend any irony consists in retrieving such a figurative meaningﬂ (Jorgensen et al., 1984: 112): However, I will argue below that Giora™s placing of these authors under the first heading is unjustified, since the conclusions she draws do not necessarily follow from their work. She sees the second position represented mainly by Searle (1979) and Grice (1975). Because for Gricean pragmatists verbal irony involves a breach of the maxim of quality, and the overt violation makes the addressee cancel the literal meaning and generate an implicature, it gives rise to a ‚two-stage comprehension process™, she claims. Giora also thinks understanding irony is essentially a two-stage process, where the speaker violates a communicative norm (in this case, her ‚graded informativeness requirement™, Giora, 1988, 1995, and not the Gricean maxim of truthfulness), and the hearer derives an ‚implicated message™ (Giora, 1995). How- ever, while Grice and Searle maintain that the literal meaning expressed by an utter- ance is the opposite of what a speaker intends to convey by using it, according to ™ Giora unjustifiedly attributes to Sperber and Wilson a number of assumptions. What Sperber and Wilson do suggest is that the notion of a ‚literal meaning™ is simply not needed theoretically to account for irony and metaphor. They do claim that utterances used ironically encode merely their ‚literal mean- ing™. This literal meaning however, is not used by an ironic speaker to convey her own thoughts, rather it is mentioned as a representation of an object of contempt, ridicule or disapproval (Jorgensen et al., 1984: 112). It doesn™t follow from this that ﬁirony does not involve a two-stage processing and is as easy to understand as literal languageﬂ, as Giora concludes (1995: 240). Sperber and Wilson have made few comments on the issue of irony understanding, but a hint about their view was indeed explicit on the paper by Jorgensen et al.: ﬁthe task of the hearer is to reconstruct both the literal meaning of the utter- ance and the attitude of the speaker toward that meaningﬂ (1984: 112-l 13). They make no claims, how- ever, as to the processes involved in this, nor the stages that the interpretation process undergoes. C. Curd I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 261 Giora the ﬁimplicated message is more attenuated or mitigated than ‚the opposite of what is saidﬂ™ (1995: 261). A further difference, she adds, is that Grice and Searle claim that the literal meaning is rejected, canceled and replaced with another impli- cated one. For Giora, the activated literal meaning should be retained rather than suppressed, and it is functional in deriving the intended interpretation (Giora, 1998: 5-6). 3. On the characterization of irony: echo or negation? As mentioned above, Giora attempts to show that the relevance theoretic view of irony is inadequate. Sperber and Wilson™s proposal is that irony is characterized by three defining features: (a) it is a variety of interpretive use in which the proposition expressed by the utterance represents a belief implicitly attributed by the speaker to someone other than herself at the time of utterance,* (b) it is echoic (i.e., it implicitly expresses the speaker™s attitude to the beliefs being represented),9 and (c) the attitude involved in the echo is one of dissociation from the thoughts echoed. Giora argues that these features are neither necessary to produce verbal irony, nor sufficient, and hence concludes that they are inadequate to define verbal irony. It seems to me that Giora™s arguments do not fully consider some features of the relevance-theoretic account of irony, and that once these are taken into account, her objections lose force. Let me go through her points in detail. As examples of ‚nonechoic™ ironies, she offers the following (1995: 246): (1) (2) I think the washing hasn™t dried (said on a very rainy day). ‚Do you Mow any G.M.? ‚, my friend asks. ‚Rings a bell™, I reply (when the person in question is well known to the speak- ers). She claims that neither (1) nor (2) are echoic because they ﬁneed not be attributed to another speakerﬂ (1995: 246). Perhaps she™s right. However, nothing in the defini- tion of echoic use (and hence of irony) imposes the requirement that an echoic ironic utterance should represent a belief attributed to anorher speaker. Echoic utterances are those that achieve relevance by informing the hearer that the speaker is enter- * Sperber and Wilson (1986: 228-229) distinguish two dimensions of language that are derived from the observation that any utterance can be used to represent things in any of two ways. It can represent some state of affairs because its propositional form is true of that state of affairs, or it can represent some other representation with a propositional content (e.g., a thought, another utterance, etc.) because of a resemblance between the two propositional forms. In the first case, they say that the utterance is used as a description, in the second, they call the utterance an interpretation. Of course, there is a sense in which ail utterances are interpretations of a thought of the speaker. So, an utterance is descriptively used when this thought is a description, and interpretively used when the thought is itself an interpretation. g An echoic utterance is one that achieves relevance by informing the hearer of the fact that the speaker has in mind some representation and also that the speaker has a certain attitude to it (Sperber and Wil- son, 1986: 238) 262 C. Curd 1 Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 taming a certain attributable thought and that the speaker simultaneously holds an attitude to it. Echoic utterances, therefore, include those cases where the speaker attributes a thought or an utterance to herself at a time difSerent from the time of utterance, precisely what the first condition on verbal irony proposed by Sperber and Wilson requires. Nothing in the definition of echoic, nor of interpretive use, rules out this possibility. In fact, it is this displacement from the ‚here and now™ which demands a sophisticated cognitive machinery to handle verbal irony, a point to which I will return later. A different issue is whether (1) and (2) are actually echoic, or under what conditions they would be echoic. Let us take the example in (1). In circumstances where the speaker may legiti- mately and reasonably wonder whether the washing has dried (e.g., the washing is drying in a partially covered shelter, the rain has just started), and uses (1) to indi- cate it, (1) would be descriptively used, given that it would be used to represent a state of affairs in the world because its propositional form is true of that state of affairs.iO In this case, the utterance may be naive, but not ironic. Interpretive and descriptive uses are mutually exclusive categories, and an utterance that is descrip- tively used cannot, by definition, be an instance of irony. In this case, (1) is not a counterexample. (1) can only be ironic if it is not put forward as a description of a state of affairs, but as an interpretation of an attributed thought or utterance, and if the speaker simultaneously and implicitly expresses towards it a dissociative attitude (which makes it echoic). In such a case, the speaker may attribute the thought or utterance to someone else, or to himself at another time. For instance, imagine that the speaker is just coming back home. Before leaving, he instructed his son to get the washing in when it dried or before, if it started to rain. As he returns, it is raining, and he notices the washing hanging outside. He utters (l), attributing it to his son or to himself in a different situation (one in which it is not raining), with an implicit attitude of disso- ciation. In such circumstances, (1) can only be ironic. Giora™s example, as it stands, can still be ironic, but only if a dissociative attitude is implicitly expressed simulta- neously. All that is needed is to view the utterance as echoing a potential utterance that the speaker could have produced in a situation where the assumption that it has been raining all day was not part of the context of interpretation. The example in (2) works in a similar way. If the speaker uses it interpretively, she must be attributing it to someone other than herself at the time of the utterance. This leaves two possibilities: she attributes it to someone else, or to herself at a dif- ferent time. The content of the utterance ‚Rings a bell™ is attributable to the speaker in a situation in which it is not mutually known to speaker and hearer that G.M. is someone very well known to the speaker - contrary to the conditions pertaining at the time of utterance in Giora™s example. Under these circumstances, (2) would be interpreted as ironic. So, the point that an utterance cannot be echoic whenever the thought it interprets cannot be attributed to someone else is based on a misinterpretation of the relevance theoretic notion of interpretive use, and all examples built upon it fail to be coun- lo The state of affairs here being a mental state of limited conviction ‚I think™ C. Curd I Lingua I10 (2000) 257-280 263 terexamples at all. Sperber and Wilson characterize verbal irony as instances of implicit echoic use in which the proposition expressed by an utterance represents an actual or potential thought or utterance attributable to someone other than the speaker at the time of utterance. To produce a real counterexample to Sperber and Wilson™s view one would need to show a case of verbal irony where the thought rep- resented by the ironic utterance can only be attributed to the speaker at the time of utterance. Giora also argues that there are cases of implicit echoic use where the attitude involved is one of dissociation and yet such utterances fail to be ironic. So, not only would there be ironic utterances that are not echoic, as her previous examples attempt to show, but also utterances that fulfill Sperber and Wilson™s characteriza- tion and are not ironic. As an example of this, she proposes (3): (3) Dina: I missed the last news broadcast. What did the Prime Minister say about the Palestinians? Mira: (with ridiculing aversion) That we should deport them. (Giora, 1995: 248) Her point is that Mira™s utterance is echoic in that it simultaneously reports a content and expresses the speaker™s attitude to what is reported, and still it doesn™t come across as ironic. However, Mira™s reply in (3) is elliptical, so that the proposition expressed by her utterance can be represented by (4): (4) The Prime Minister of Israel said that we should deport the Palestinians. Now, this is a clear case of descriptive use. Mira is using her utterance to represent a state of affairs in the world because the proposition it expresses is true of it (namely, the actual state of affairs where the Prime Minister of Israel has said that the Palestinians should be deported). Sperber and Wilson™s claim is that ironies are cases of interpretive use, and their prediction, then, is exactly the same as Giora™s: there is no reason why (3) should come across as ironic. Though the utterance in (3) contains an interpretation of the Prime Minister™s discourse, (3) is not an interpreta- tion itself. Moreover, the attitude of dissociation expressed by the speaker is directed to the embedded interpretation ‚we should deport them™. Mira is not dissociating her- self from the proposition expressed by her utterance. Rather on the contrary, she™s endorsing it qua description of a state of affairs in the world. She is using her utter- ance to describe a state of affairs in the world in virtue of its propositional form being true of it. It would be very strange for a theory to predict that any case of reported speech combined with the implicit expression of a dissociative attitude on the part of the speaker would produce an instance of verbal irony, and certainly this is not what Sperber and Wilson™s characterization of irony does. It therefore seems that Giora™s objections to the relevance theoretic approach to irony are unfounded. In another paper, I have provided a few examples which, I think, refute Giora™s characterization of irony at a descriptive level (0.~~6, 1999). 264 C. Curd 1 Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 Because here I want to concentrate on the issue of how irony is processed, let us assume that both views account equally for the data and turn to this point. 4. On the psycholinguistic processing of verbal irony The past twenty years have seen a considerable number of experiments looking at the psycholinguistic processing of figurative language. Giora has grouped some of this research as endorsing what she calls the ‚processing-equivalence hypothesis™ (Giora, 1998: 3). These experiments, she argues, have attempted to show that ﬁunderstanding literal and nonliteral language require equivalent processesﬂ (1998 : 3)ﬁ. She sees them as presenting an alternative view to ‚traditional theorists™, such as Grice (1975) and Searle (1979), who, in her view, ﬁassumed that understanding nonliteral language requires a sequential, multiple-stage process, involving first a lit- eral interpretation which is then revisitedﬂ (1998: 3).‚* Giora™s proposal is put for- ward as an alternative to both positions: she suggests that it is not literal or nonlit- eral meaning that determines the type of processing followed, but her notion of ‚meaning salience™.13 First, I would like to suggest that the picture she draws for this area is not fully justified. I argue that Sperber and Wilson™s characterization of verbal irony does not lead to a ‚processing-equivalence hypothesis™. In particular, it does not predict a one- stage process in the interpretation of verbal irony, and it does not suggest that irony should be as easy to understand as literal language. Rather on the contrary, it allows for a ‚multiple-stage processing™ for both literal and non literal language, and it points towards the hypothesis that verbal irony should in general be more difficult to understand than literal language. Given the features used by Sperber and Wilson to define verbal irony, it follows in fact that irony should require a more complex set of cognitive abilities than comprehending literal discourse, whether or not this is reflected directly in the length of time each takes to process.i4 I™ These experimental research would fall within position (a) mentioned above, to which Giora attrib- utes the idea that understanding irony is a one-stage process, the idea that irony shouldn™t be any more difficult to understand than literal language, and the idea that irony shouldn™t take longer to understand than literal language. I2 Research that would fit in position (b) above, holding the ideas that irony comprehension involves a two-stage process, that it is more difficult to understand than literal language, and that it should take longer to understand than literal language. I3 Giora defines salience as follows: ﬁ‚Ihe meaning of a linguistic expression is considered salient in case its interpretation can be directly computed from the lexical meanings automatically asociated with entries before any extra inferences based on contextual assumptions have been derivedﬂ(Giora, 1998: 3). According to the graded salience hypothesis (Giora, 1997, in press), for information to be salient, i.e. to be foremost on one™s mind, it needs to be stored or coded in the mental lexicon. Salience, however, is not an either-or notion in her view. Rather, it admits of degrees. The more familiar, frequent, conven- tional, or prototypical the information, the more salient it is. A full discussion of Giora™s notion of salience is beyond the scope of this paper. I4 In fact, Sperber and Wilson™s theory allows precise predictions about the type of cognitive abilities that an adequate handling of verbal irony demands and the kind of cognitive deficits that should impair C. Curd I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 26.5 Second, I look into the role of negation in the frameworks proposed both by Giora and by Sperber and Wilson, and contrast the consequences each view would have for the process of comprehending verbal irony in terms of the ability to manipulate men- tal metarepresentations of different orders. In what follows I take Giora™s claims about the relevance-theoretic approach to irony one by one. 4.1. On the stages of comprehension in verbal irony Contrary to what Giora concludes, relevance theory does not suggest a one stage interpretation process for any kind of discourse, much less for ironic utterances. What Sperber and Wilson do say is that figurative language is not a deviation from standard norms of language, and that no special principles of interpretation are required to understand it. They claim that, as with any other instance of utterance interpretation, a hearer who processes an ironic utterance is trying to select amongst the set of all possible interpretations of an utterance the one that was intended by the speaker, exactly as he,does in processing all kinds of discourse, whether ironically intended or not. In so doing, the hearer™s process is guided by the search for optimal relevance, that is, the search for an interpretation consistent with the Communicative Principle of Relevance (CPR, also called Second Principle of Relevance, SPR, Sper- ber and Wilson, 1995).i5 Sperber and Wilson™s claim is that the fast interpretation tested and found consistent with the CPR will be selected as the one intended by the speaker. But they make no claims as to how many potential interpretations a hearer will need to test before hitting on the one he will finally attribute to the speaker. In fact, it is most likely that on several occasions - not necessarily involving figurative language - candidate interpretations will be considered and abandoned before a hearer recovers the one attributed to the speaker. Clearly, this allows for a multi- stage process of interpretation in a large number of cases. Consider for instance the case of puns, or the case of short-lived misunderstandings self-corrected by the hearer, to name but a few. It is one thing to maintain that understanding natural lan- the capacity to engage in figurative language, something Happ6 (1993) has already pointed out and pro- vided evidence for. I5 The Second Principle of Relevance (SPR) is a communicative principle (as opposed to the First Principle of Relevance, PPR, which is a broader principle pertaining to cognition in general). The FPR states that the human cognitive system is looking for relevant information, and the more relevant, the better. The SPR establishes that every utterance creates a presumption of its own optimal relevance, where it is understood that an utterance, on a given interpretation, is optimally relevant if and only if (a) it has enough contextual effects to be worth the hearer™s attention, and (b) it puts the hearer to no unjus- tifiable effort in achieving those effects. Sperber and Wilson propose that hearers have at their disposal a pragmatic criterion that allows them to choose amongst the set of all possible interpretations one that can be attributed to the speaker. This criterion is called the Criterion ofconsisrency with the principfe of relevance and is stated as follows: An utterance, on a given interpretation, is consistent with the princi- ple of relevance if and only if the speaker might reasonably have expected it to be (or to seem) optimally relevant to the hearer on that interpretation (Sperber and Wilson, 1995). In interpreting utterances, according to Sperber and Wilson™s proposal, listeners look for an interpretation that is consistent with this criterion, and the fast interpretation to meet it is the one selected (Sperber and Wilson, 1995). 266 C. Cured I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 guage is a cognitive task constrained by one single principle, regardless of the type of discourse encountered. It is quite another to claim that the precise process, includ- ing the stages, the type of mental representations at work, and the complexity of their manipulation will be identical in all occasions of discourse interpretation. As far as I can see, only the first claim can be attributed to relevance theory, and not the second. It seems then that relevance theory is perfectly compatible with, and indeed predicts, a several-stage process of comprehension on a number of occasions, which may well include figurative utterances. There is, however, a genuine issue about whether a hearer computes candidate interpretations serially or in parallel.i6 As far as I know, this point is not fully settled, but it seems to me that the assumptions of the relevance theoretic account do not lead to a view of a one-stage process of interpretation for verbal irony. Let us go further into the reasons that led Giora to suppose that relevance theory does not predict several stages of interpretation for verbal irony, nor a more complex interpretation process than it does for literal language. She says: ﬁThe echoic-men- tion theory assumes that irony does not involve a two-stage procedure, because no norm is violated and therefore no implicature is generated. As a result, irony is as easy to understand as nonironic languageﬂ (1995: 261). However, the fact that no norm is violated on Sperber and Wilson™s account of irony is merely a result of their general framework, where no communicative norms are stipulated, but where the existence of implicatures is, of course, fully acknowledged. The idea that no impli- cature is generated in understanding verbal irony is simply not part of Sperber and Wilson™s proposal. Besides, there seems to be no reason to conclude that because no norm is violated ﬁirony is as easy to understand as nonironic languageﬂ. Causes for processing difficulty in the interpretation of verbal irony, as I will argue below, may come from several different sources, and certainly, not only - and not even neces- sarily - from rule or maxim violations. Undoubtedly, Sperber and Wilson claim that the notion of a ‚figurative meaning™ is not needed theoretically to account for irony and metaphor.ﬂ They also insist that all that is encoded (as opposed to conveyed) by ironic utterances is their ‚literal meaning™. Hence, according to Sperber and Wilson, hearers need not go through two stages of interpretation where first a literal meaning is computed and then a figura- tive meaning is recovered, because there is nothing like a ‚figurative meaning™.i8 I6 On the issue of serial versus parallel processing, see Bezuidenhout et al. (1999). where an important contribution to the question of the role of literal meaning in understanding utterances is also found. I7 More recently, the idea that there should be a theoretical notion of ‚literal meaning™ has also been challenged within relevance theory (see Carston, 1999). Ia In fact, relevance theorists would now be more precise about the notion of ‚literal meaning™ as a the- oretical construct. An utterance encodes a certain linguistic meaning (logical form and other encoded instructions), and it communicates a set of propositional forms, which are derived by pragmatic inference even at the level of ‚what is said™. As Carston (1999) has argued, a ‚literal meaning™ in the Gricean sense of ‚what is said™ (encoded linguistic meaning, disambiguated and with referents assigned) is probably not a representational level at all in utterance interpretation. Inferential processes through which linguistically encoded concepts get enriched or loosened are taken to be at work at very early stages during interpreta- tion. Hence, the standard view withing relevance theory is that minimal propositions obtained from lin- guistic decoding, ambiguity resolution and reference assignment, which are not communicated, are C. Cur& I Lingua II0 (2000) 257-280 267 However, this doesn™t mean that the whole process of interpretation should be over after the proposition expressed by an utterance has been computed, nor that the ironic interpretation is recovered at this point. I9 Hearers may well need to go through several stages until they finally hit on the intended ironic interpretation. According to Sperber and Wilson, the literal meaning is not used by an ironic speaker to convey her own thoughts. Rather, the proposition expressed by an utter- ance is used interpretively as a representation of an object of contempt, ridicule or disapproval (Jorgensen et al., 1984: 112).20 It doesn™t follow from this either that ﬁirony does not involve a two-stage processing and is as easy to understand as literal languageﬂ, as Giora concludes (1995: 240). After the proposition expressed by an utterance has been retrieved, hearers still need to recognize that it represents a thought the speaker is entertaining and attributing to someone other than himself at the time of utterance, and they need to distinguish the implicit expression of the speaker™s dissociative attitude from this thought. Nothing has been said about ‚stages™ in which this might occur, but the task need not be cognitively simple, even if carried out fast. Besides, stages and difficulty of comprehension are two variables not necessarily connected in a simple way. It is possible to conceive of a very com- plex single stage, so that even if irony comprehension should take place in one sin- gle stage (as it probably does at times, for instance, in the cases of conventional - hence salient - irony studied by Giora and Fein (1999)), it is not a necessary con- clusion that it is as easy to interpret as nonfigurative language. Let us then turn to the issue of the relative difficulty of interpreting literal and nonliteral language. 4.2. On the relative dificulty of interpreting literal and nonliteral language Sperber and Wilson have in fact made very few comments on the issue of irony understanding. However, Jorgensen et al. (1984) make a crucial point which seems to suggest a relevance theoretic answer to this question: ﬁthe task of the hearer is to reconstruct both the literal meaning of the utterance and the attitude of the speaker toward that meaningﬂ (1984: 112-I 13, my emphasis). They make no claims, how- ever, as to the processes involved in this, nor about the difficulty attached to the recovery of the ironic interpretation.21 unlikely to be computed at all, not even as the vehicle by means of which the communicated assumptions are recovered. There am, however, other assumptions which do help recover the intended interpretation (i.e. implicated premises, contextual assumptions) and these are probably entertained in the process of understanding. The above remarks suggest that an analysis of irony is possible and fruitful without any reference to notions such as ‚literal meaning™ and ‚figurative meaning™ as theoretical constructs. I9 Notice that Sperber and Wilson™s contention is against ﬁclassical accounts of irony (which) assume a specialized mechanism of meaning inversion that does not seem to govern any other mental processﬂ, as opposed to standard accounts of metaphor, where it is discussed in terms of mental processes such as the ability to perceive similarities, to construct or appreciate analogies, to condense verbal expressions, which apply to other domains as well (Jorgensen et al., 1984: 112). *O The first version of the echoic view of irony talks of ‚mention™ of a linguistic expression, and not of interpretive use, but the essence of the account is the same. *™ Giora (1995: 239-240) also attributes to Jorgensen et al. (1984) and Sperber (1984) the idea that ﬁirony has only one interpretation and involves processing only one meaningﬂ. Distinguishing between 268 C. Cured I Lingua 110 (2000) 2X-280 The idea is that an ironist interpretively uses an utterance while he implicitly expresses his own attitude of dissociation from its literal meaning. But there is no reason to suppose that a hearer jumps to the final interpretation at the same speed and at no extra cost than he would if the same utterance were literally intended. In fact, the prediction of relevance theory is quite the opposite. On Sperber and Wilson™s account, irony need not be as easy to understand as literal language, as Giora takes them to propose. In fact, the issue of the relative difficulty of both types of interpretation boils down to asking whether attributing to the speaker a thought about an attributed thought, as well as an attitude of dissociation from it which he does not communicate explicitly, is as easy a task as interpreting an utter- ance literally or not. The answer suggested by the work of Happe (1993) and Cur& (1995, 1997) and by the evidence found by Smith and Tsimpli (1995) is it is not. 4.3. Recognizing attribution What is involved then in retrieving an interpretation? Since Grice characterized meaning and communication in terms of the communicator™s intentions there have been extensive discussions about what intention it is that the hearer must recognize in verbal communication. Humans have a remarkable ability to attribute intentions to others. In fact, if confronted with a situation where the behavior of humans is observed, other humans tend to prefer explanations given in terms of the intentions of the agents involved over other kinds of explanation. Communication merely exploits this fact. Participants in a conversation are constantly representing the mental states of speakers as they interpret their utterances. Not only do they compute the proposi- tional content of utterances and relate it to the propositional content of thoughts attributed to the communicator, but they attach to this propositional content certain attitudes. In other words, it is not enough for an interpreter to compute the proposi- tional content of an utterance of ‚I™ll come tomorrow™. In the process of retrieving the interpretation intended by the speaker, he will need to attribute to the speaker also some propositional attitude of belief, hope, etc. to that propositional content. The view within relevance theory is that communication involves producing a certain stimulus intending thereby to inform the audience of something (what Sper- ber and Wilson call the informative intention) and to inform the audience of one™s informative intention (known in the framework of relevance theory as the commu- nicative intention). Notice that the communicative intention is a second-order infor- mative intention (an intention about an intention, Sperber and Wilson, 1986: 29). Communication demands then, not only an ability to represent facts and basic the notions of interpretation and meaning should be of help at this point. By ‚meaning™ Sperber and Wil- son refer to the literal meaning encoded by the utterance, but such meaning cannot be the final interpte- tation an ironic utterance will receive if at all understood as such by its hearer. To recognize an utterance as ironically intended, the proposition it expresses should be recognized as an interpretation of an attrib- uted thought, and the speaker™s attitude to it needs to be recovered. As in all cases of utterance compre- hension, the material linguistically encoded by the utterance, which gives rise to a representation close to the folk notion of ‚literal meaning™, is just an element to retrieve the ‚final interpretation™, which will be identified as that intended by the speaker. C. Curd I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 269 thoughts, but also an ability to represent primary representations, sometimes referred to as an ability to metarepresent. To interpret a piece of discourse as an act of osten- sive communication, a hearer must recognize the speaker™s communicative intention, even if the informative intention is not fulfilled. On the other hand, an ability to decode does not require the ability to attribute intentions to others. In computing the propositional form of an utterance, a competent hearer needs to be able to recognize the relationship between it and a thought of the speaker™s, and also the relationship that holds between that thought and what the thought itself rep- resents. So, what is for an utterance to be literal in Sperber and Wilson™s terms? ﬁ[A]n utterance, in its role as an interpretive expression of a speaker™s thought, is strictly literal if it has the same propositional form as that thought.ﬂ (1986: 233) A hearer of a literally intended utterance will compute the propositional form of an utterance, will attribute to the speaker a thought having the same propositional form, and will assess whether the speaker might reasonably have expected it to be (or to seem) optimally relevant to the hearer on that interpretation.22 The next question I would like to raise concerns the representational level is required to perform this operation. Let us refer to the propositional content of the utterance as p. For the sake of exposition, we can simplify things a bit and use the following diagram to illustrate the level of representation involved: S intends me to know that S thinks that P When an utterance is ironically intended, a competent hearer will somehow recog- nize that the speaker could not reasonably have expected it to be (or to seem) opti- mally relevant to the hearer on a literal interpretation, so the process will not stop here. But what is needed to detect an ironic intent? This time, the hearer will need to attribute to the hearer not the thought interpreted by his utterance (a first order metarepresentation), but a thought about a thought attributed to someone other than the speaker at the time of utterance (a second order metarepresentation), illustrated as follows, where S™ is different from S at the time of the utterance: S intends me to know that S thinks that S™ thinks that P 22 Someone with a deficit in his ability to attribute mental states to others would be able to handle only coded communication, and hence, his interpretations would be literal most of the time. It is important to notice, though, that even when the fmal interpretations coincide, the processes undergone by normal com- petent hearers, and by subjects with an impaired ‚theory of mind™ will be different, even if their observ- able behaviour is the same in terms of the interpretation they give to an utterance literally intended. 210 C. Curd I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 Clearly, mentally representing this is a more complex operation, involving as it does entertaining a metarepresentation of a higher order. This shows that relevance theory cannot be taken to predict that there will be the same cognitive complexity involved in interpreting literal and ironic language. Now, what empirical evidence is there in support of this view? Leslie (1987, 1988) has suggested that pretending and representing certain mental states requires metarepresentation, that is, an ability to entertain not only mental rep- resentations, but also mental representations of basic representations. Even attribut- ing a first-order false belief (e.g. John doesn™t know that p) is not a simple cognitive task. It is known that children develop this capacity only at about 3.5 years, and that most autistic subjects never do. So, the ability to me&represent can be impaired, and it is now recognized that such impairment can appear in different degrees. Understanding second-order intentions (intentions about other™s mental states) is of course more complex than understanding first-order intentions.23 There is some evidence that a minority of autistic subjects develop some metarepresentational abil- ities and succeed in understanding first-order intentions, but cannot attribute a sec- ond-order false belief of the type ‚John doesn™t know that Peter knows . ..™ (Baron- Cohen, 1989). Interestingly, the different levels of impairment seem to correlate with specific cognitive difficulties, such as those involved in interpreting similes, metaphors and ironies. Happ6 (1993) studied individuals with different levels of impairment in their abil- ity to metarepresent, and hence, to attribute mental states to others. Her hypothesis, based on the claims of relevance theory, was that ﬁif most autistic individuals cannot represent a speaker™s intention, then communication should break down most noticeably where the speaker™s attitude must be taken into account in modifying the literal meaning of the utterance . . . In the face of the puzzle that ostensive communication must pose them, they may have no choice but to adopt a rigid interpretation - a default value of the propositional form of the utterance.ﬂ (1993: 1O3)x I showed above how the characterization of irony made within relevance theory makes it clear that understanding irony requires an understanding of a higher order metarepresentation: a thought about an attributed thought. What Happe found was a direct relation between degree of metarepresentational ability and degree of commu- nicative ability. Autistic subjects who failed all the metarepresentation tests were only able to interpret language literally, while autistic subjects who passed first-order metarepresentation tests were able to comprehend metaphors, but not irony. Only 23 In fact, between a cognitive organism with an ability to represent mentally only basic representations and a cognitive organism with the ability to form representations of representations there seems to be a crucial evolutionary step (see Sperber, 1994, 1996, in press). 24 It must be remarked that even when the observable behaviour of normal and impaired subjects coin- cides in interpreting literally intended utterances, the processes followed by each group of people are substantially different. For autistic people, a literal interpretation is a default option, arising from their intact ability to decode. For normal individuals, the literal interpretation represents a thought attributed to the speaker, as well as an interpretation consistent with the SPR. C. Curd I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 271 those autistic subjects who passed second-order metarepresentation tests displayed the ability to understand the whole spectrum of utterances, including irony.*™ Along the same lines, in their study of Christopher, an autistic individual with remarkable linguistic abilities, Smith and Tsimpli (1995) found that he is invariably truthful, seems incapable of lying and to handle irony and metaphor, and has general trouble with any pragmatic task demanding metarepresentational abilities. These results suggest the need to analyze the processing of nonliteral language exploring in detail the type of mental metarepresentations involved in understanding it. 4.4. Understanding dissociation Sperber and Wilson do not go into details about what is involved in retrieving a dissociative attitude in the process of reaching a final ironic interpretation. However, as I have attempted to show (Cur&, 1993, the identification of a dissociative atti- tude can be explained in terms of the Communicative Principle of Relevance (CPR) in the following way. According to the CPR, the hearer is entitled to assume that the utterance yields enough cognitive effects for no unjustifiable processing cost. Given this principle, the existence of a contradiction between the propositional content of a contextual assumption and the content of some assumption conveyed by the utter- ance may lead the hearer to attribute an attitude of dissociation to the speaker. In this way, a clash between context and the propositional content of the utterance may act as a cue for the attribution of a dissociative attitude. This is not, of course, to say that communicative devices such as tone of voice, raising of eyebrows, gestures, etc. do not play a role in triggering the recognition of an attitude of dissociation. However, such devices might be said to direct the hearer toward the sort of clash I have described. Since it might be felt that this account does not differ from that of Giora™s let me spell it out in more detail. First-order clashing propositional contents of the type mentioned are entertained in a number of cases where irony is not intended. Con- sider, for instance, repairs in discourse, occasions when a hearer decides that a speaker is mistaken, or lying, or expressing disagreement, or trying to convince the hearer of something he is reluctant to accept. In some of these cases, there may be intended or unintended falsehood, in others, the question is not one of truth, but merely of conflicting propositional forms, regardless of their truth value. I would like to argue that the difference between irony, on the one hand, and any of the other cases where a propositional clash is encountered (mistakes, lies, arguments, decep- tion), on the other, is also associated with the order of the metarepresentations in which the clashing propositions become embedded. Take the case of an utterance of (5) 25 Notice that a Gricean view of what is involved in the interpretation of figurative language (i.e., com- puting the literal meaning, finding that it does not fit the context and accesing the opposite meaning for irony, and a related meaning for metaphor) would not predict these results: understanding irony would not call for any ability that understanding metaphor does not also require, irony and metaphor would both be as easy or as difficult to interpret. 212 C. Curd I Lingua 1 IO (2000) 257-280 (5) Mr. Z is a president concerned about his people. Imagine this is uttered in a context where it is highly salient to me that Mr. Z is not a president concerned about his people. What we have here is a clash of fust-order propositional contents. Of course, there is no contradiction in a system of beliefs that holds both lp and Peter says thut p. However, an interpreter will want to know why Peter says that p when it is so salient to him that lp. My point is that in cases like this, a hearer will embed the clashing propositional forms in metarepresentations in such a way that no contradiction arises, and that there are a number of ways in which this can be done. The more specific claim I want to make is that the order of the metarepresentation in which p and 7 are embedded in the inferential process of understanding an utterance is crucial for the recognition of an ironic intent. There are a number of different possible ways in which a hearer might approach the utterance in (5). In the inferential processes that are illustrated below, the first premise is always the same, and it is what allows the hearer to recognize the speaker™s communicative intention. The second premise is a metarepresentation con- taining the contextual assumption that clashes with the propositional content of the utterance. Notice how its order affects the resulting interpretation. Case 1. The hearer concludes that the speaker is mistaken. Embedding the clashing contextual assumption in a first order metarepresentation will lead to the conclusion that the speaker is mistaken. That is, the capacity to attribute a false belief to the speaker rests on the hearer™s ability to manipulate a first order metarepresentation. Premises (1) The speaker intends the hearer to know that the speaker intends the hearer to believe that Mr. Z is a president concerned about his people. (2) The hearer believes that Mr. Z is not a president concerned about his people. Conclusion: The hearer concludes that the speaker is mistaken. Case 2. The hearer concludes that the speaker is lying. Recognizing a deliberate nontruthful contribution requires the capacity to embed the clashing assumption in a second order metarepresentation, and to manipulate it in an inference as follows. Premises (1) The speaker intends the hearer to know that the speaker intends the hearer to believe that Mr. Z is a president concerned about his people. C. Cut& 1 Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 213 (2) The hearer believes that the speaker believes that Mr. Z is not a president concerned about his people. Conclusion: The hearer concludes that the speaker is lying. Case 3. The hearer concludes that the speaker is trying to convince her that p, or arguing that p. Of course, engaging in an argument, or recognizing an attempt to convince a hearer of something, involves representing not only the beliefs of the speaker, but also the beliefs of the speaker about the beliefs of the hearer, something that clearly demands a more complex representational capacity. Premises (1) The speaker intends the hearer to know that the speaker intends the hearer to believe that Mr. Z is a president concerned about his people. (2) The hearer believes that the speaker believes that the hearer believes that Mr. Z is not a president concerned about his people. Conclusion: The hearer believes that the speaker is arguing against him, or trying to convince him of something the hearer doesn™t believe. Case 4. The hearer concludes that the speaker is being ironic. The recognition of an ironic intent demands embedding the clashing contextual assumption in a me&representation of at least fourth order. Premises (1) The speaker intends the hearer to know that the speaker intends the hearer to believe that Mr. Z is a president concerned about his people. (2) The hearer believes that the speaker believes that the hearer believes that the speaker believes that Mr? Z is not a president concerned about his people. Conclusion: The hearer believes that the speaker is ironic. 274 C. Curd I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 5. Indirect negation and dissociation. On the surface, indirectly negating a propositional form and dissociating oneself from it might seem like two fairly connected actions. Let me explain how Giora con- ceives of indirect negation in her approach to irony. It seems Giora assumes that, at least for irony, indirect negation amounts to a computation of the difference between the literal meaning of an utterance and a rep- resentation of the ironicized situation: ﬁThe view of irony I present here suggests that irony is a form of negation that does not make use of an explicit negation marker. An affirmative (more often than a negative) expression is used to implicate that a specific state of affairs is different or far from the taken-for-granted, expected (or more desirable) state of affairs, explicitly indicated by the same affiiative expression. Such a view suggests that irony does not cancel the indiictly negated message, as suggested by the traditional and pretense accounts. Nor does it necessarily implicate its opposite as contended by the traditional view. Rather, it entertains both the explicit and the implicated messages so that the dissimilarity between them may be computed. By saying ‚What a lovely party! ™ in the middle of a lousy party, the ironist points out that the party fails (standard) expectations and is far from being lovely. In the act of processing the utterance, then, the sur- face meaning is involved. The product is, therefore, and interpretation close to ‚how far it is from being the expected lovely party™.ﬂ (1995: 241) It would seem that attributing to the speaker a thought along the lines of ‚how far it is from being the expected lovely party™ (Giora™s view) is fairly similar to attributing to the speaker the intention to let the hearer know that he has in mind a potential, attributable thought with the propositional content that the party is lovely, while at the same time implicitly attempting to convey that it is absurd to entertain such thought given the circumstances (Sperber and Wilson™s view), only Sperber and Wilson™s formulation of the issue is more complicated than Giora™s. But is this an accident? Is this a mere question of simplicity in stating a position or is there some- thing else that makes the two approaches differ? In order to compare them along the same parameters, let me try to recast Giora™s proposal in terms of the metarepresen- tational demands imposed on the hearer, as I did with Sperber and Wilson™s above. Let us take the example in (5). If I understand her correctly, the ironic utterance would receive an interpretation along the lines of ‚how far is Mr. Z from being the expected president concerned about his people™. The interpretation would be recov- ered via some process where an indirect negation of the explicit content of the utter- ance would be contrasted with it. The interpretation, I take it, would result from ﬁcomputing the difference between the explicit and the implicated messagesﬂ (Giora, 1995: 241), where perhaps the ‚implicated message™ is the fact, salient to speaker and hearer, that Mr. Z is not a president concerned about his people at all, as suggested by the following quotations: ﬁ[IIrony is viewed as a mode of indirect negation . Based on this view, interpreting irony does not involve canceling the indirectly negated message and replacing it with the implicated one . . . Rather, irony understanding involves processing both the negated and implicated messages, so that the differ- ence between them may be computed.ﬂ (Giora, 1995: 239) ﬁAccording to the indirect negation view, the literal meaning of an ironic utterance is functional in irony comprehension, because it enables the comprehender to compute the difference between the literal C. Cm-d I Lingua I1 0 (2000) 257-280 215 meaning (usually pertaining to a desirable state of affairs) and the ironicized (less desirable) situation or object.ﬂ (Giora and Fein, 1998: 5) Notice that Giora and Fein make use of the notion of desirability. If we accept, along with Sperber and Wilson, that beliefs are the only primary representations, desires would have to be represented as second-order representations (first-order metarepresentations). ﬁLet us assume that there is a basic memory store with the following property: that any representation stored in it is treated by the mind as true description of the actual world, a fact. What this means is that a fundamental propositional attitude of belief or assumption is pre-wired into the very architecture of the mind . ...ﬁ. desires could play a cognitive role only by being represented in factual assumptions of the form I desire that p. (Sperber and Wilson, 1986: 74) Let us now think of the assumptions a hearer would need to manipulate according to Giora™a account. 26 Upon hearing ( 5 ) , a hearer would perform an inference involv- ing (a), (b) and (c) as premises, whereby he would compute the difference between (a) and (c).~™ Premises a. Mr. Z is not a president concerned about his people. b. The speaker says that Mr. Z is a president concerned about his people. C. It is desirable that Mr. Z is a president concerned about his people. Conclusion: It is far from being the case that Mr. Z is a president concerned about his people. The prediction of Giora™s characterization of verbal irony is then that compre- hending irony would not demand the very sophisticated metarepresentational capac- ity I have suggested it does. It will be enough with being able to entertain first order metarepresentations. But if this is so, how can one explain the findings of HappC (1993), which, as already mentioned, show that autistic subjects without second- order metarepresentational capacity fail to interpret irony? In this respect, Giora™s view seems to be more in line with Grice™s since it doesn™t predict a difference in the processing difficulty of metaphor and irony. The empirical evidence I have men- 26 For sure, this is but a free paraphrase of her view, and I alone am resposible for any misconception or misrendering of Giora™s proposal. 27 I have excluded from this pattern the metarepresentational premises needed to recognize a commu- nicative intention, in the terms of Sperber and Wilson (1986), simply because this notion is not part of Giora™s approach to verbal communication. Another reason why the metarepresentational demands pre- dicted by Giora are much lower than those resulting from Sperber and Wilson™s view is that Giora™s characterization completely omits talking about atMs.don and about propositional attitudes. The crucial role of these two notions in the relevance-theoretic proposal clearly accounts for the complex metarep- resentational resulting picture. 276 C. Curd I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 tioned, however, speaks against this particular consequence of both approaches, and supports the characterisation of metaphor and irony made within relevance theory. Happ6 herself (1993) points out how relevance theory can help explain why sim- iles, metaphors and ironies are increasingly difficult to comprehend. Similes can be understood at a purely decoding level. Of course, a competent hearer will need some inference to fully understand something like ‚She is like a rainbow™, since he will have to establish where the similarity between ‚she™ and ‚a rainbow™ lies, but the decoding process indicates explicitly that this comparison must be made, exactly as in the case of interpreting ‚She is like her sister™. In any case, for someone without a theory of mind, a default interpretation resulting from mere decoding would do. However, if we accept the relevance theoretic view that metaphor is a form of loose talk, someone who interprets ‚She is a rainbow™ has to realise that the proposition expressed by the utterance is only a loose interpretation of the speaker™s thought. A hearer will need to attribute to the speaker the intention to communicate a thought that interpretively resembles the proposition expressed by his utterance.28 Happ6 makes clear that this task is very close to that of attributing a false belief to another person, which requires a first order theory of mind. Understanding irony, as we have seen, is more complex, demanding as it does the possession of a second order theory of mind. Let us now consider the empirical evidence in support of Giora™s approach. To test the view of irony as a form of indirect negation, Giora and her colleagues con- ducted an experimental study where they showed that the literal meaning of an iron- ically interpreted utterance is activated and retained (Giora and Fein, 1998, 1999), thereby contradicting the assumptions of Grice and Searle, who believed the literal meaning was rejected and suppressed during interpretation. This is taken as evidence in support of the indirect negation view of irony, because it means that the literal meaning of an ironic utterance is functional in irony comprehension.29 Nonetheless, it seems to me that while indeed Giora and Fein have provided evi- dence that the propositions expressed by ironically intended utterances are computed and retained in the process of understanding irony, they have only thereby shown that (something close to) the literal meaning of an utterance is functional in deriving an ironic interpretation. Their finding is important in that it constitutes evidence against the rhetoric and the Gricean approaches to the interpretation of irony, which assume that the literal meaning is rejected. It doesn™t, however, provide strong direct evidence in favor of the indirect negation view of irony. The findings of Giora and Fein are equally compatible with the idea that irony is a variety of implicit interpre- tive use of language, where the hearer echoes an attributed thought and simultane- ously expresses an implicit dissociative attitude from it. The proposition expressed 28 The notion of interpretive rese.mblance between two propositional forms is defined in terms of the logical and contextual implications they share. The more implications they share, the closer their inter- pretive resemblance is. (Sperber and Wilson, 1986). 2g According to Gemsbacher and Faust, meanings relevant to comprehension are retained, while infor- mation that is no longer functional in comprehension is suppressed (Gemsbacher, 1990, Gemsbacher and Faust, 1990, 1991, cited by Giora, 1998). C. Cured I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 271 by the utterance is also functional in this view. It is the object of the propositional attitude of dissociation and therefore, it cannot be said to play no role in the inter- pretation process, or be ‚rejected™, as Giora puts it. 7. Negation and dissociation again Before drawing this paper to a close, let me add a few remarks about Sperber and Wilson™s proposal. Recall that they claim that one of the three characteristic features of verbal irony is that it is a variety of interpretive use in which the proposition expressed by the utterance (my emphasis) represents a belief implicitly attributed by the speaker to someone other than the speaker at the time of utterance. There is a type of irony, frequently overlooked in the literature, in which the speaker is ironic even though he means what he says (i.e., he endorses the content of the proposition expressed by her utterance). Consider for instance (6) uttered in a context where the speaker is trying to say something to the hearer and the hearer™s attention is clearly somewhere else: (6) I love it when you pay attention to me. Although the utterance is ironic, it just does not seem to be the case that the speaker is implicitly dissociating herself from the belief represented by the proposition expressed by her utterance. In (6) the proposition expressed represents a belief the speaker endorses. Because of this, Giora has argued that similar cases cannot be accounted for by the echoic view, ﬁbecause the speaker does not dissociate herself from the opinion echoedﬂ (Giora, 1995: 247). I don™t think that this type of example (also considered by Gibbs and O™Brien, 1991, and Cut-co, 1995) proves the echoic view of irony wrong, but such cases cer- tainly show that it needs some reformulation so that its claims are made clearer and more specific. Imagine that it is a habit of the hearer to get distracted when the speaker addresses him, or to dismiss his opinions. Suppose as well that, to the speaker™s surprise, on this specific occasion the hearer has been particularly attentive to what the speaker has to say and has even replied ‚I think you™re right. Let™s do as you suggest™. In such a scenario, a speaker uttering (6) endorses the proposition expressed by her utterance and also all the strong implicatures to which it gives rise, for instance, the implicated conclusion that the speaker is now pleased that the hearer has paid atten- tion to him, represented by (7): (7) The speaker is now pleased by the attention the hearer has paid her. Normally, (7) would have been derived from the utterance and the contextual assumption in (8): (8) The hearer is paying attention to what the speaker is saying. 278 C. Cut-cd I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 Imagine however a different scenario: one where the speaker is trying to get a point across and the hearer is overtly concentrating on something else. The speaker utters (6). This time, the utterance does not carry the implicature in (7). For one thing (8) is not manifest in the context of interpretation. I would like to argue that the difference between situations where (6) is ironic and situations where it is not hinges on two related factors: (a) whether the speaker dis- sociates himself not from the content of the proposition expressed, but from the implicatures to which the utterance would normally give rise, and (b) the kind of contextual assumptions that are at stake in interpreting the utterance. The view of irony where the target of the echo is taken to be the opinion directly represented by the proposition expressed by the utterance is too narrow. Nonethe- less, this is not what the requirements on irony proposed by Sperber and Wilson nec- essarily demand. They do not claim that the target of the echo (that from which the speaker dissociates) should be the proposition expressed, but only that the proposi- tion expressed by the utterance should interpretively resemble a thought of the some- one other than the speaker at the time of utterance. From this it does not follow that the target of the implicit dissociation should be the content of the proposition expressed itself, as the requirement is often interpreted. An ironic speaker who uses an utterance interpretively can be expressing an attitude of dissociation from any of the range of assumptions that the utterance makes strongly mutually manifest, not only, and not necessarily, from the proposition expressed by his utterance. Whether a hearer will search for the implicit expression of such an attitude depends crucially on the type of assumptions that are mutually manifest to the speaker and the audi- ence. Finding some contradiction is, of course, a significant factor in this process. So, the echoic view would benefit from a slight modification to acknowledge that the opinions echoed by the utterance need not be those represented by the content of the proposition it expresses. It can have as its target the propositional content of one or more of its implicatures, and even the propositional content of an assumption that the utterance makes strongly mutually manifest. 8. Concluding remarks I have argued that some of Giora™s qualms about the relevance-theoretic approach to irony are, to a large extent, unfounded. I have also tried to trace the main differ- ences and similarities between her view of irony as an indirect form of negation and Sperber and Wilson™s idea that it is a variety of implicit echoic use, with a resulting picture that differs at several points from her own. With regard to a number of issues concerning processing, such as the stages involved in the interpretation of verbal irony, I have suggested that the two views may have more in common than Giora originally thought. Concerning the relative difficulty of processing ironic and literal language, I have tried to show that not only does relevance theory not differ from Giora™s suggestion in that it does not claim that figurative language is as easy to understand as literal language, but it goes further than Giora herself in predicting a very complex process of interpretation for ironic C. Cured I Lingua I10 (2000) 257-280 279 discourse. I haven™t dwelled much on the issue of the length of time it takes to process literal and nonliteral language first because I see no obvious prediction of the relevance theoretic account in this respect, and second because I am not sure that complexity and length of time of processing will always correlate. Finally, my own way of interpreting the relevance theoretic framework when analyzing irony has led me to notice that very often during the process of interpreting ironic utterances con- tradictions are encountered. This may be linked, of course, to some vaguely defined notion of negation. However, I think that what is characteristic of the comprehension of verbal irony is not whether or not some propositional content is computed along with its negation, but the way in which the contradiction encountered is manipulated. What distinguishes irony from other communicative acts is, I believe, the degree of the metarepresentations involved in handling it. References Baron-Cohen, S., 1989. The autistic child™s theory of mind: A case of specific developmental delay. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 30,285-297. Bezuidenhout, A., R. Morris, and C. Cutting, 1999. The role of literal meaning in the understanding of utterances. Paper delivered at the International Pragmatics Conference on Pragmatics and Negotiation PRAGMA 99, Tel Aviv University, June 1999. Carston, R., 1999. Linguistic meaning and literal meaning. Paper delivered at the International Pragmat- its Conference on Pragmatics and Negotiation PRAGMA 99, Tel Aviv University, June 1999. Clark, H. and R. Gerrig, 1984. On the pretense theory of irony. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 113, 121-126. Cur&, C., 1995. Some observations on the pragmatics of humorous interpretations: A relevance-theo- retic account. UCL Working Papers in Linguistics 7, 2747. Curc6, C., 1997. The pragmatics of humorous interpretations: A relevance theoretic account. Ph.D. dis- sertation. University of London. Curc6, C., 1999. Lenguaje figurado y teorfa de la mente. To appear in: Estudios de Lingilistica Aplicada 29. Dubois, J., 198 1. A general rhetoric. Translated by P.B. Burrell and E.M. Slotkin. Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins. Gemsbacher, M., 1990. Language comprehension as structure building. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Gemsbacher, M. and M. Faust, 1990. The role of suppression in sentence comprehension. In: G. Simp- son (ed), Understanding word and sentence 97-128. Amsterdam: North Holland. Gemsbacher, M. and M. Faust, 1991. The mechanism of suppression: A component of general compre hension skill. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition 17(2), 194-207. Gibbs, R., 1986a. On the psycholinguistics of sarcasm. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 115, 3-15. Gibbs, R., 1986b. Comprehension and memory for nonliteral utterances: The problem of sarcastic indi- rect requests. Acta psychologica 62, 41-57. Gibbs, R., 1994. The poetics of mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Gibbs, R. and R. Gerrig, 1989. How context makes metaphor comprehension seem ‚special™. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity, 4(3), 143-158. Gibbs, R. and J. O™Brien, 1991. Psychological aspects of irony understanding. Journal of Pragmatics 16, 523-530. Giora, R., 1988. On the informativeness requirement. Journal of Pragmatics 12, 547-565. Giora, R., 1995. On irony and negation. Discourse Processes 19, 239-264. Giora, R., 1997. Understanding figurative and literal language: The graded salience hypothesis. Cogni- tive Linguistics, 7/l, 183-206. 280 C. Cured I Lingua 110 (2000) 257-280 Giora, R. (in press). On our mind: Salience, context and figurative language. New York: Oxford Uni- versity Press. Giora, R. and 0. Fein, 1998. Irony: Graded salience and indirect negation. Metaphor and Symbol 13: 83-101. Grice, P., 1975. Logic and conversation. In: P. Cole and J. Morgan (eds). Speech acts (Syntax and semantics 3), 41-58. New York: Academic Press. Happ& F., 1993. Communicative competence and theory of mind in autism: A test of relevance theory. Cognition 48, 101-119. Jorgensen, J., G. Miier and D. Sperber, 1984. Test of the mention theory of irony. Journal of Experi- mental Psychology: General 113, 112-120. Kreuz, R. and S. Glucksberg, 1989. How to be sarcastic: The echoic reminder theory of verbal irony. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 118, 112-120. Leslie, A., 1987. Pretence and representation: The origins of ‚theory of mind™. Psychological review 94, 412-426. Leslie, A., 1988. Some implications of pretence for mechanisms underlying the child™s theory of mind. In: J. Astington, P. Harris and D. Olson (eds.), Developing theories of mind, 196. New York: Cambridge University Press. Martin, R., 1992. Irony and universe. of belief. Lingua 87,77-90. Searle, J., 1979. Expression and meaning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Smith, N. and I. Tsimpli, 1995. The mind of a savant. Oxford: Blackwell Sperber, D., 1994. Understanding verbal understanding. In: J. Khalfa, (ed), What is intelligence?, 179- 198. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Sperber, D., 1996. Explaining culture. A naturalistic approach. Oxford: Blackwell. Sperber, D. (in press). Metarepresentations in an evolutionary perspective. To appear in D. Sperber (ed.), Metarepresentations. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Sperber, D. and D. Wilson, 1981. Irony and the use-mention distinction. In: P. Cole (ed), Radical prag- matics, 295-318. New York: Academic Press. Sperber, D. and D Wilson, 1986. Relevance: Communication and cognition. Oxford: Blackwell. Stringfellow, F., 1994. The meaning of irony: A psychoanalytic investigation. New York: Sunny. Wason, P. and S. Jones, 1963. Negation: Denotation and connotation. British Journal of Psychology 54, 299-307. Wilson, D. and D. Spcrber, 1992. On verbal irony. Lingua, 87,53-76. 