ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 305-3 13 www.elsevier.nl/locateilingua Book review Frajzyngier, Zygmunt, Grammaticalization of the complex sentence. A case study in Chadic. (Studies in Language Companion Series, 32.) Amsterdam: Ben- jamins, 1996. ISBN (hb.) 90-272-3035-8 (Europe) 1-55619-843-4 (US). 501 pp. Hfl 256/$ 128. Reviewed by Stefan Elders, Department of African linguistics, Leiden University, P.O. Box 9515, 2300 RA Leiden, the Netherlands. 1. Introduction This book is a study of complex sentences constructions for one particular African language family, spoken in the countries around Lake Chad (Chad, Cameroon, Nige- ria, Niger). The Chadic language family constitutes one of the branches of the Afroasiatic family and counts about 140 languages, the largest and best known being Hausa. It consists of four major branches: West, Central (also known as Biu-Man- dara), East and Masa (Newman, 1992). Grammaticalization of the complex sentence (GCS) aims both at reconstructing Proto-Chadic syntax and surveying the grammat- ical encoding of complex sentences and their markers. The book is a pioneering study, as there exists no comparable overview of com- plex sentence constructions for other branches of Afroasiatic nor for other African language families. It is partly based on the descriptions available and partly on lin- guistic fieldwork by the author and other members of his project. Only a quarter or so of the Chadic languages could be included in this comparative study, because some descriptions do not deal with the complex sentence or with syntax at all, while other languages again are hardly known. His sample nevertheless contains represen- tative data from languages of all four major branches. The book is intended for a general linguistic audience; the discussion includes other African languages as well as English and Slavic languages, especially the author™s native language, Polish. The author links the syntactic description and comparison for one particular language family to theoretical discussions on grammaticalization and functionalist typology. The book has the following outline: Introduction (Ch. l), Paratactic and sequen- tial constructions (Ch. 2), Functions of complementizers (Ch. 3), Complements of saying (Ch. 4), Embedded interrogatives (Ch. 5), Complements of volitional verbs (Ch. 6), Complements of verbs of perception (Ch. 7), Complements of cognitive 0378-2166/W/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(99)00038-8 306 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 305-313 verbs (Ch. 8), Temporal clauses (Ch. 9), Conditional clauses (Ch. lo), Relative clauses (Ch. 1 l), Summary and implications (Ch. 12). 2. Syntactic features of Chadic languages As a general syntactic characteristic, most Chadic language have SVO as their basic constituent order, but some Central Chadic languages have VSO. The order of clauses in complex sentences ist mostly Main-Embedded. The order Embedded- Main is used in temporal and conditional clauses, though some languages contrast Embedded-Main and Main-Embedded for temporal clauses (p. 308). Some lan- guages use a contrast between the two orders for other semantic distinctions: e.g. Xdi (Central Chadic; VSO) has Main-Embedded for a de re complement of a verb of saying and Embedded-Main for a de &to complement (p. 116120). I agree in major points with F. I will concentrate on five issues that are interest- ing for a general audience: verbs of saying and their complements (2.1), raising (2.2) temporal and conditional clauses (2.3), relative clauses (2.4) and coordination and related structures (2.5). When discussing these points, I will remark on compa- rable cases in unrelated languages. 2.1. Verbs of saying and their complements Verbs of saying and their complements are crucial to an understanding of com- plex sentences. F invokes the distinction between the notions de ditto (the domain of speech, hypothetical) and de re (the domain of reality) (see also Frajzyngier, 1991). F observes that, contrary to other complement clauses, complements of verbs of say- ing have a wide range of modality values; de ditto complementizers (as well as logophoric pronouns) are primarily used with verbs of saying. They often originate in verbs of saying. Related to this pattern is the high variation in lexemes for ‚say™: grammaticalization of verbs of saying into complementizers leads to their semantic bleaching and, finally, replacement. F does not raise the question, however, how verbs with a different lexical meaning can become verbs of speaking and whether synchronic polysemy can shed some light on this question. Matrix clauses of verbs of saying are characterized by what F calls verb omission and complementizer omission. I agree with his argument against a syntactic deletion rule in these two cases, but I would not call these structures verb omission or com- plementizer omission, for structural and semantic reasons. The presence versus the absence of the verb of saying constitutes two different structures to me. The same argument holds for the presence versus the absence of the complementizer. The matrix clause without a verb of saying is interpreted, or translated for that matter, as if it had a verb. A matrix clause of a verb of saying followed by pause and comple- ment clause is what I call loose subordination, as there is no morpheme linking the two clauses. Another syntactic characteristic often found in Chadic and in African languages in general is the fact that the pause occurs after the de ditto complemen- tizer: the complementizer belongs to the main clause. Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 305-313 307 F observes that matrix clauses without ‚say™ are found in languages from all four major branches of Chadic and can be found in other African languages as well; addi- tional examples can be found in Adamawa-Ubangi, e.g. Mundang (Elders, 1999), Tupuri (Ruelland, 1992) and Ngbaka-Ma™bo (Thomas, 1963). F observes that a matrix clause without ‚say™ is not restricted to African languages and he gives an example from his native language, Polish. This structure also (marginally) exists in colloquial Dutch for a dialogue in reported speech. Dutch uses in this construction the preposition van ‚of™ as a complementizer. Its modal meaning is that the speaker expresses his/her non-commitment towards the propositional content of the comple- ment clause; it could be translated by ‚like, something like™. The hierarchy of omis- sions F. proposes is corroborated by Dutch: first the verb ‚say™ can be omitted, then the complementizer and finally the subject. In Dutch, too, the pause follows the de ditto complementizer. Further, the matrix clause in Dutch shows that the absence of ‚say™ is not necessarily related to the grammaticalization of ‚say™ to a de dim com- plementizer; the Mundang complementizer of uncertainty/non-commitment ne from an interrogative particle is another case in point. Dutch Ik (zei) (van): kun je dat niet doen? ‚I said like: can™t you do it? I said like can you that not do Hij (zei) toen (van): geen sprake van ‚He then (said) (like): No way! ™ he said then like no speech of I would like to point out that de dicta complementizers in some languages show morphological particularities. In Lele (East), subject pronouns cliticize to a pre- ceding complementizer, e.g. n&i ‚that-he™ (p. 114). In East Dangla (East), the de dim complementizer partially ressembles a verb in that it has a subject pronoun: I@ hn-dii gii-s ‚they told me that . . . ™ lit. they said-me they-that . . . ™ De ditto com- plementizers are often used in other contexts than verbs of saying: embedded inter- rogatives, volitional verbs, cognitive verbs, verbs of perception, relative clauses, even as marker of temporal/conditional clauses. This fits into a general African pattern (Lord, 1976). Additional data from Adamawa can be supplied by Tupuri, where the de ditto complementizer ga is used with other morphemes in several subordinate clauses: relative; comparative; causal; manner and three types of tem- poral conditional clauses (simultaneous, stipulative, eventual) (Ruelland, 1992: 567-577). 2.2. Raising One of the formal issues concerning volitional verbs (Ch. 6) and verbs of per- ception (Ch. 7) is subject-to-object raising. F argues that raising is not a purely syn- tactic operation - contrary to generative syntax - but that it is a means to encode modal distinctions. As for complements of volitional verbs, Bole (West) admits rais- ing only for the third person singular, while other persons are marked by both an object pronoun with the matrix verb and a subject pronoun with the embedded verb 308 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 305-313 (p. 263-264). Mandara (Central) admits raising only for the first person singular (p. 269-270). Such facts cannot be accounted for in a formal syntactic analysis. The distinction between raising and no raising in Pero (West) encodes realis versus hypothetical mood in the embedded clause (p. 267-268). In the case of verbs of per- ception, raising is a means to encode direct perception. Lele (East) has a raising structure only for the third person: the object suffix of the matrix verb is interpreted as the subject of the embedded verb. The pattern is comparable to that found in Bole. 2.3. Temporal and conditional clauses F argues that in complex sentences with a temporal (Ch. 9) or conditional (Ch. 10) clause, both protasis (the temporal/conditional clause) and apodosis (its matrix clause) may be marked. Temporal clauses are marked in several ways: by mere jux- taposition, without additional marking; by a relative clause whose head is ‚time™: ‚the time that X™; by a headless relative clause; by temporal protasis markers origi- nating in demonstratives, sequential markers, locative prepositions or de ditto com- plementizers. The protasis marker originating in a demonstrative following the clause is explained by structural metonymy: part of the sign (demonstrative) stands for the whole sign (relative temporal clause). All sequential markers meaning ‚(and) then™ also occur as apodosis markers, the reverse is not necessarily true. Though the exact meanings and origins of apodosis marker differ, F observes that they all nar- row the nature of the temporal relation between the protasis and apodosis: sai in Hausa indicates ‚immediate temporal vicinity™, while kii in Xdi (Central) indicates that an event actually happened. For the temporal clauses and conditional clauses, a strict form-to-meaning analysis would have made the data on these clause types more accessible: some languages distinguish temporal and conditional clauses, while in others the same structure can either have a temporal or conditional inter- pretation. F claims that the temporal marker ma in several Chadic languages stems from a conditional marker. This is an important point, because it runs counter to a general linguistic tendency that conditionals stem from tempo&. It is furthermore impor- tant for his claim that semantic change in grammaticalization can be bidirectional. The evidence for the direction of change is however equivocal. There is a similarity between the interrogative ma ‚what™ and a conditional marker, and in some lan- guages, ma occurs both as a temporal and a conditional marker. F observes (p. 312) that the marking of temporal and conditional clauses is divergent even among closely related languages. Though F evaluates possible scenarios of grammaticaliza- tion, in the case of temporal and conditional, he does not consider the possibility that the languages in which ma only marks a condition have restricted the use of a tem- poral/conditional marker due to the introduction of a new temporal marker. Another problem in the analysis of conditional clauses is that he claims (p. 41all) that conditional apodosis markers originate from protasis clause-final demonstratives/ definite markers, though he does not give any evidence for the clause structure of his examples. Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 305-313 309 2.4. Relative clause F defines a relative clause as a clause modifying an NP. Relative clauses may have additional markers: relative markers (relative pronouns), postrelative markers, relative tenses. At least one language, Giziga (Central) uses a participle in a relative clause. The presence of relative markers is not a defining feature of relative clauses, as they may also occur in other complex constructions. Relative markers indicate what F calls the existential status of their head noun, that is whether it has been pre- viously mentioned in discourse or not. Pero (West), for example, contrasts two rela- tive markers: ma (head noun previously mentioned in discourse) vs. ci (not previ- ously mentioned). Though relative markers and postrelative markers tend to be in complementary distribution across Chadic, Kanakuru (West) has both. As the mark- ing of relative clauses differs, F concludes there were probably several patterns: rel- ative marker marked by a demonstrative, by an associative marker and by an indefi- nite marker. The Chadic pattern of a relative clause marked by several morphemes is also encountered in Mundang: a determiner is used as relative marker; the pronominal subject in a relative clause as well as a temporal/conditional clause is a focus pro- noun, rather than a regular subject pronoun; there is a special tense marker for the relative clause and temporal/conditional clause; the near demonstrative - also used anaphorically - may occur as a postrelative marker. The use of these morphemes cannot be described in purely syntactic terms, their presence must therefore also be determined by discourse features. 2.5. Coordination and related structures Most chapters deal with subordinate clauses; Ch. 2 considers coordinate-like con- structions. F rightly states that the mere distinction between coordination and subor- dination is not sufficient to describe the various types of complex constructions in Chadic. He distinguishes between asyndentic coordination (parataxis), sequential clauses and subordination. Paratactic constructions consist of juxtaposed clauses, only separated by an internal pause. Sequential clauses are marked by a sequential marker. They cannot be negated and show restrictions on their subject. Only some languages have coordinated clauses comparable to European lan- guages, but a sentence coordinating conjunction cannot be reconstructed as the forms are widely divergent. It arose by independent innovation in the various languages; e.g. a preposition ‚with™/NP conjunction ‚and™ was often generalized to a sentence coordinating conjunction, as in Kera (East) dhhnl ‚and™ (p. 29). Adversative coordi- nation often contains borrowed amma ‚but™, from Arabic or from one of the lingua francas in the region (Hausa, Fulfulde, Kanuri) which have ultimately borrowed it from Arabic. Unfortunately, F does not involve serial verb constructions (SVC™s) in his discus- sion of complex sentence constructions. This follows from F™s definition of a com- plex sentence as a construction consisting of more than one clause, rather than it being any construction more complex than a clause with a single predicate. Serial 310 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 305-313 verb constructions are generally considered as single clauses with a complex verbal predicate. In a structural typology of complex sentences, SVC™s have to be included, because an SVC with the same subject differs only minimally from a paratactic or sequential construction in which the clauses have an identical subject. The distinc- tion F makes between paratactic, sequential and coordinate constructions should therefore be expanded into a serial verb construction. Mundang makes such as four- fold distinction. F claims hat SVCs play an important role in Chadic languages, this is however not proven in the rest of the book. 3. General criticism Points of general criticism are three-fold. First of all, grammaticalization can only be studied after the completion of a reconstruction. Second, I find some of his ety- mologies not convincing. Third, sometimes the data are not handled accurately. A disadvantage of the grammaticalization approach that F follows is that synchronic and diachronic analyses are not always well distinguished. The prerequisite of any historical linguistic study is that language data first have to be analyzed synchroni- tally. This especially holds for hitherto undescribed languages. First of all, the basic formal facts have to be accounted for and only then does it make sense to go into semantic issues. Further, phonologically reliable reconstructions of lexemes and grammatical morphemes are indispensable for questions about grammaticalization in its historical sense. Only if these requirements are met can reliable etymologies of grammatical morphemes be established - this approach avoids too much speculation. Another weakness of such a grammaticalization analysis is that it focusses too much on the development of individual items. When lexemes change to grammatical mor- phemes they may fit into already existing paradigms. A case in point is the occur- rence of ‚complementizers™ between the subject and a verb, as in Masa ma ‚doubt- in-truth™ (p. 186), Daba ka ‚volitional™ (p. 265), Gidar protasis marker nB (p. 331). In many African languages, this is typically a position for tense/aspect/mood mark- ers, but such markers may also indicate notions like subordination. It would be important to know what other morphemes can occur in this slot in the languages dis- cussed. Although F, pays much attention to the etymology of grammatical morphemes, I still have some reservations. The cases differ as to how easily the source of a gram- matical morpheme can be retraced. Some cases are convincing, but require addi- tional explanation. The development of ‚God™ to conjunction is a case in point. The word Allah can be used in the Islamic world as an interjection for surprise. In Lele (East) it is both used as an interjection preposed to a sentence as well as a counter- expectation coordinative marker (p. 81-83). This is corroborated by a conjunction with a similar function in Portuguese. The optative marker oxala goes back to Ara- bic idallah ‚may God . . . ‚. Moreover, F™s etymologies include rather tenuous cases such as the conditional marker in Gidar (Central) (p. 396-400). F claims all the fol- lowing morphs to be related: a lexeme va ‚hand™ (exx. 76, 77); a definite stem va (exx. 7%82), which can be used anaphorically (exx. 83-85); a temporal marker Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 305-313 311 ‚once™ (ex. 86); a doubt-in-truth marker (ex. 87); a conditional marker (exx. 88-89). As there is no demonstrative for spatial deixis with v(a) the link between ‚hand™ and definite remains speculative - at least, there is no clear synchronic link. The etymol- ogy of the conditional marker 6e in Giziga is probably a borrowing from neighbour- ing Mundang, rather than a case of grammaticalization from ‚say™. In Mundang, 62 is a clause-final Perfect marker that is also used in hypothetical clauses. A more gen- eral problem in the reconstruction of grammatical morphemes is that they often have a CV shape with frequent consonant and vowel qualities. If several grammatical morphemes have a similar form and if this form is stated in very general terms like *kV, almost any other similar morpheme could be related (p. 365). The book has some technical imperfections. Page numbers of examples quoted from grammars are sometimes not indicated. The handling of some 30 languages demands considerable accuracy, but some statements show that sources have been hastily consulted. The marker sai (with High tone) in Hausa is given as shi (with Rising tone), though Hausa has no rising tone at all. This error results from a misin- terpretation of the phonetic transcription of sai in Abraham (1962: 761), in which the diacritic indicates a centralized allophone of a. As Abraham (1962: viii) states in his introduction ﬁ4 indicates vowel heard in English ‚cut™ ﬁ. Some errors in text processing could have been observed by the publisher, such as xxx appearing in the text or section headings appearing at the end of a page. The last paragraph of 262 contains an error that is relevant for his discussion of raising: ﬁthe object of the embedded [should be: matrix] clause is simply coreferential with the subject of embedded clauseﬂ. Examples 125 and 126 on p. 267 have been turned around. Table 9.1 (p. 308) has the columns: language; matrix-embedded; embed- ded-matrix. This should read: language; embedded-matrix; matrix-embedded. As the author addresses himself to a general linguistic audience, his introduction could have included one or two pages with the complete classification of Chadic lan- guages, because not all readers can be expected to be acquainted with their classifi- cation. Cursory remarks about nomenclature should have been included in such an introduction; Xdi is the same as Hide (Crozier and Blench, 1992: 109). Mina is closely related to Daba (p. 265), but the fairly reliable Atlas Linguistique du Camer- oun only lists Besleri/Hina (Dieu and Renaud, 1983). Some tables reproduce Chadic wordlists from Kraft (198 1). Kraft (198 1: 1) explicitly states that he included some non-Chadic languages from Northern Nigeria in his Chadic wordlists, because these languages are hardly known. F nevertheless copies them in his tables (p. 110, pp. 208-211). They belong to Benue-Congo (Jaku, Jari, Bankala) or Adamawa (Yingu- lum) (see Crozier and Blench, 1992). 4. Conclusion GCS is an original contribution to the specialist field of Chadic linguistics, African linguistics as well as general linguistics. It is accessible for linguists who are not acquainted with Chadic languages or with any other African language families. GCS signals that Africanist linguists have to pay attention to the syntax and seman- 312 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 305-313 tics of complex constructions as well as to the interaction between syntax and dis- course. Chadic linguistics has achieved considerable progress over the last decades. Com- parative Chadic linguistics has been focussing on reconstructing aspects for the com- mon ancestor, Proto-Chadic and GCS fits into this trend. F™s discussion of grammat- icalization shows the need for reliable morphological reconstructions for Chadic. One way to arrive at a better integration of descriptive and historical-comparative linguistics is to shift the focus of historical-comparative research to low-level groups with a limited number of languages, e.g. the Masa group or the Bura-Margi group. Another promising direction for syntax and discourse studies in Chadic is areal-typo- logical comparison. Chadic languages are spoken in a linguistically highly diverse area. Contact phenomena have drawn some attention in Chadic linguistics (e.g. Hoff- mann, 1970; Jungraithmayr, 1980, 1987; Wolff and Gerhardt, 1977) and this should be expanded into syntax and discourse studies. An areal-typological comparison of Chadic languages with neighbouring Niger-Congo (like Plateau and Adamawa; not mentioned in GCS) and Nilo-Saharan languages (like the Sara-Bongo-Bagirmi lan- guages; not mentioned in GCS) would be worth the effort. Given the descriptions available, such a study could be started by comparing Mupun, described in Frajzyn- gier (1993), with neighbouring Birom (Plateau branch of Benue-Congo), for which there exists a grammar with texts (Bouquiaux, 1970 a,b). References Abraham, R.C., 1962. Dictionary of the Hausa Language. London: University of London Press. Bouquiaux, Luc, 1970a. La langue birom (Nigeria septentrional). Phonologie, morphologie, syntaxe. (Bibliotheque de la Facultt5 de Philosophie et Lettres de 1™Universite de Liege, 185.) Paris: Les Belles Lettres. Bouquiaux, Luc, 1970b. La langue birom (Nigeria septentrional). Textes avec commentaire. (Biblio- thbque de la Facultt? de Philosophie et Lettres de I™UniversiM de Liege, 186.) Paris: Les Belles Let- tES. Crazier, D.H. and R.M. Blench, 1992. An index of Nigerian languages (second edition). Abuja: Lan- guage Development Centre, Nigerian Educational Research and Development Council, Abuja, Fed- eral Capital Tenitory/Ilorin: Department of Linguistics and Nigerian Languages, University of Ilorin, Kwara State/Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics. Dieu, Michel and Patrick Renaud, 1983. Atlas linguistique de 1™Afrique Centrale (ALCAM): Atlas lin- guistique du Cameroun (ALCAM). Situation linguistique en Afrique centrale, inventaire pmlimi- naire: le Cameroun. Paris: ACCT/Yaounde: DGRST, CERDOTOLA. Elders, Stefan, to appear. Grammaire mundang. Leiden: Research School CNWS. [also PhD disserta- tion.] Frajzyngier, Zygmunt, 1991. The de dicfo domain in language. In: Elizabeth Closs Traugott and Bemd Heine (eds.), Approaches to grammaticalization, vol. 1, 219-251. (Typological Studies in Language, 19/l.) Amsterdam: Benjamins. Frajzyngier, Zygmunt, 1993. A grammar of Mupun. (Sprache und OraWt in Afrika, 14.) Berlin: Reimer. Hoffmann, Carl, 1970. Ancient Benue-Congo loans in Chadic? Africana Marburgensia 3(2), 3-23. Jungraithmayr, Hemnann, 1980. Kontakte zwischen Adamawa-Ubangi und Tschad-Sprachen: Zur Ubertragung grammatischer Systeme. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenhindischen Gesellschaft 130, 70-85. Book review / Lingua 110 (2000) 305-313 313 Jungraithmayr, Herrmann (ed.), 1987. Langues tchadiques et langues non-tchadiques en contact en Afrique Centrale. (LACITO-Documents, Afrique 10, Contacts de langues et contacts de culture 5.) Paris : SELAF. Kraft, Charles H. (ed.), 1981. Chadic wordlists. (Marburger Studien zur Afrika- und Asienkunde; Serie A: Afrika, Band 23-25.) Berlin: Reimer. Lord, Carol, 1976. Evidence for syntactic reanalysis: From verb to complementizer in Kwa. In: Sanford B. Steever et al. (eds.), Papers from the Parasession on diachronic syntax, 179-191. Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society. Newman, Paul, 1992. Chadic languages. In: William Bright (ed.), International Encyclopedia of Lin- guistics, vol. 1, 253-254. New York/Oxford: Oxford University Press. Ruelland, Suzanne, 1992. Description du parler tupuri de Mindaore (Tchad). Phonologie, morphologie, syntaxe. Lille: Atelier National de Reproduction de Theses. [These d™Etat, Universite de la Sorbonne Nouvelle, Paris III.] Thomas, Jacqueline MC., 1963. Le parler ngbaka de Bokanga. Phonologie, morphologie, syntaxe. Paris/The Hague: Mouton. Wolff, Ekkehard and Ludwig Gerhardt, 1977. Interferenzen zwischen Benue-Kongo- und Tschad- Sprachen. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenhtndischen Gesellschaft, Supplement 3: 1518-1543. 