ELSEVIJZR Lingua llO(2000) 157-182 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua On Antoine Culioli™s theory of enunciative operations™ Marie-Line Groussier* UniversitP Paris 7-Denis Diderot, 11 rut Waldeck-Rousseau, 95880 Enghien les Bains. France Received 1 April 1999, revised version 4 July 1999 Abstract Antoine Culioli began elaborating his Theory of Enunciative Operations in the sixties and has never stopped improving and extending it ever since. He appears as the follower of those European linguists like Roman Jakobson and Emile Benveniste among others who considered linguistics could not be anything else than the search for meaning through forms. Central ele- ments in the theory are, first, the topological model of the notion and notional domain as con- structed round the organizing centre or typical occurrence, second, the operation of location as the basic operation at all stages of the construction of utterances, third, the part played in the construction of the referential values of utterances by the abstract coordinates of the Situ- ation of uttering i. e. the enunciator, co-enunciator and moment of uttering. Culioli™s theory has a cognitive dimension and his formalization uses concepts adapted from logics and math- ematics but he has always been particularly anxious to stress the irreducible specificity and autonomy as a science of linguistics which should not be taken for an extension either of cog- nitive psychology or of mathematics. 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Culioli; Enunciative operations 1. Introduction This paper is an attempt at giving a description of the linguistic theory worked out by the French linguist Antoine Culioli from the early sixties on.™ I was lucky enough * Phone: +33 I 39 64 70 55; E-mail: groussier@paris7.jussieu.fr * My thanks go first to John Anderson who kindly asked me to write this description of the Theory of Enunciative Operations. Let Claude and Nicole Rivikre be also thanked for reading both versions. Their remarks and scholarship in linguistics and particularly in Culioli™s theory have been invaluable help. ™ It is not without some apprehension that one undertakes to describe a theory that is still being improved and added to by its author and some of his numerous followers even though one has been prac- tising it for nearly forty years. I hope this contribution will give as true an image of Culioli™s theory as possible. Of course, any error or misinterpretation will be mine. 0378-2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved PII: SOO24-384 I (99)00035-2 158 M.-L. Groussier I Lingua I10 (2000) 157-182 to witness, as a student, the beginnings of Culioli™s cautious and uncompromisingly rigorous progress in the elaboration of a theory which, at the time, was running counter to the hegemonic mainstream of generative grammar. Culioli was one of the first to consider it necessary, for a linguist, to have more than superficial knowledge of cognitive psychology in order to acquire a deeper insight into the bases of lin- guistic representation. He also made it a point to study logic and topology with a view to formalization. Antoine Culioli™s 1983-1984 Doctoral Seminar, first offset-printed in 1985, was translated into English with a commentary and comparisons with other theories, especially Langacker™s, by Michel Liddle in 1995.2 Whenever possible, I shall quote from Liddle™s translation, giving the French original in a note. When quoting from a previous work, I shall give the French text followed by its translation into English. Quotations in English without a French version are from papers written in English. One of the striking features of Culioli™s work is that he is not only interested in a detailed account of linguistic facts, but that he has also, from the beginning, thought about linguistics from the epistemological angle. The following quotations from Culioli (1995), outline the place and nature of the linguist™s work. [I] ﬁWe cannot countenance considering languages to be codes of a stable, universal reality. A text is not a permanent representation of a pre-defined reality, immutable for all speakers. With an utterance or a text string we are dealing with an ordering of markers. The idea of an ordering is connected to that of a schema, and thus to good canonical forms, regularities (‚patterns™ [in English in the original]). Markers are representations of representations. On level 1, we are dealing with representations, on level 2, repre- sentations, separable substitutes, markers, i.e. traces of operations.3 Hence we are presented with a com- plex situation: some operations will lead us from 1 to 2 and they are more numerous than one might think because there is also an anterior level, outside linguistics, which is the area of cognitive activity in the broadest sense of the term: the construction of our perceptions, our tastes, our dislikes, our collective representations, objects with cultural properties, physically and subjectively determined. [. . .] Level 3 concerns metalinguistic operations.ﬁ(Culioli, 1995: 27)4 * From now on, I shall refer to Liddle™s translation by ‚Culioli, 1995™. 3 The term operation is used here with a meaning transposed from its mathematical meaning. A lin- guistic operation is a process through which an element can be turned into a modified element of the same nature or a different element. For instance, the operation of predication consists, for the enuncia- tor, in establishing a link between two notions by means of a third relational notion (see below 3.4.2.). The result of the operation of predication is a predicated lexis, with two arguments linked by a predicate. In addition, the operation of predication turns simple notions into parts of a complex notion. 4 The original text in French, here translated by Michel Liddle, is: ﬁNous ne pouvons pas nous placer, [. .] dam une conception qui considererait les langues comme des codages dune realitt qui serait stable pour tous - un texte n™est pas un representant stable dune realitt predtcoupee, stable pour tous les locu- teurs - Quand on a un enonct ou une suite textuelle, on a affaire a un agencemenr de marqueurs. La notion d™agencement est IiCe a la notion de schemas, done de bonnes formes canoniques, de r6gularites (‚patterns™). Les marqueurs sont des representants de representations. Au niveau 1, nous avons affaire B des representations; au niveau 2 des representants, des substituts detachables, des marqueurs i. e. des traces d™operations. Vous avez done une situation complexe: on aura des operations qui vont faire que vous allez passer de 1 a 2 et c™est plus qu™il n™y parait car il y a aussi un niveau anterieur qui est hors du domaine de la linguistique et qui est tout le domaine de l™activite cognitive au sens large, i. e. construc- tion de nos perceptions, de nos gouts, nos degotits, nos representations collectives, des objects avec des proprittes culturellement, physiquement, subjectivement dtterminees. M.-L. Groussier I Lingo ii0 (~~~ 157482 159 A definition of Level 3 is found earlier in the same chapter: [II] ﬁThen we construct level 3, a - necessarily metalinguistic - system of representation we can control, since it maintains a certain relationship with level 2. I am constructing a metalinguistic tool to represent textual phenomena and I can reduce it to a system of rules and operations such that they can account for the possibility of having a certain type of utterance and the impossibility of having another, why one needs to use a particular marker to translate into another language and the im~ssibility of using ano~er.ﬁ(Culioli, 1995: 23)5 To these definitions should be added the definition of the object of linguistics found in several places in Culioli™s writings: [Ill] ﬁThe problem of linguistics [...I is the following: is its object languages or language? For me it is language apprehended through the diversity of natural languages and reRisters.ﬁ(CuIioli, 1995: i3)& The second part of this paper will be on the epistemological principles stated in Antoine Culioli™s work and teaching. The third part will outline some crucial con- cepts in the model of metalinguistic representations named ‚Level 3™ in the above excerpts. 2. Epistemological demarcation of the field of linguistics Culioli shares his repeatedly asserted purpose to study ‚language apprehended through the diversity of natural languages™ with other linguists. What is more char- acteristic is the fact that this purpose is overtly stated as a sine qua non condition of linguistic research. Investigations should not be confined to one language or even to one family of related languages, e.g. the Indo-European family, since whoever did -- Le niveau 3 [. . .] conceme les operations mbtalinguistiques.ﬂ (Culioli, 1985: 16) The word level used here is misleading as it might be thought to refer to a stage in the production / perception of language. As the translation of Culioli™s niveau, level refers to a representational plane. Roughly, Level I refers to the plane of pre-linguistic representations, that is, concepts. Level 2 refers to the plane of observable linguistic phenomena, that is, material representations of Level 1 representations. These two levels could be mistaken with production stages. Yet, what is called Level 3 is very far removed from them, in fact heterogeneous: LeveI 3 is the rationalized representation of the relation between Level 2 phenomena and Level 1 representations. 5 The French text runs: ﬁPuis nous avons constmit un niveuu 3 qui est un systime de reprksentation necessairement mdtalinguistique qui va pouvoir &re contr6lb car it va Btre dam une certaine relation par rapport a 2. Je construis un outil mttalinguistique pour rep&enter les phenomenes textuels et je peux le ramener a des systemes de regles et d™op&ations de telle man&e qu™elles puissent rendre compte de la possibilite d™avoir tel type d™enonces et de I™impossibilitb d™avoir tel autre type d™enonces, de la neces- site de traduire dam une autre langue en utilisant tel marqueur ou l™impossibilite d™utiliser tel autre mar- queur.ﬂ (Culioli 1985: o-7) h French version: ﬁLe probleme de la linguistique est le suivant: S™occupe-t-elfe des langues ou du lan- gage? Pour moi, iI s™agit du langage uppr~~end~ d travers ta diversit des langues natureiles et des niveaux de tangue.ﬂ (Culioli, 1985: 1) 160 M.-L. Groussier I Lingua 110 (2000) 157-182 this would run the risk of mistaking local phenomena for general ones and this would be a damning mistake considering that the ultimate purpose of the linguist is the quest for invariants through a theoretical framework that should make it possible to account both for the apparent diversity and the deep resemblances between lan- guages. [IV] ﬁLes langues sont a la fois variees et chacune singuliere, mais [. .] tomes supportent la generalisa- tion grammaticale (et la traduction), preuve qu™elles ont, sous-jacents, des schemas et des operations uni- verselsﬂ(Culioli, 1973) [‚Languages are at the same time varied and individually unique, but grammatical rules can be gen- eralized out of all of them and all of them can be translated. This proves that universal underlying schemata and operations are at work in them.‚] However, the quest for invariants is not an attempt to construct a universal gram- mar such as Chomsky™s in his 1975 Revised Extended Standard Theory. [V] ﬁ. the goal is not to construct a universal grammar, but to re-construct, by a theoretical and formal process of a foundational sort, the primitive notions, elementary operations, rules and schemata which generate grammatical categories and patterns specific to each language. In short, the goal is to find invariants which found and regulate language activity, as this activity manifests itself through the mean- ingful configurations of different languages.ﬂ (Culioli, 1978, reprinted 1990: 72) The difference between Culioli™s invariants and Chomsky™s Universal Grammar is that the ‚operations, rules and schemata™ Culioli calls invariants are not supposed to constitute a grammar, but only very general conditions for the construction of var- ious grammars. 2.2. A theory of observation Linguistic investigation being thus based on the dialectic relationship between language and individual natural languages, a model will be developed through abstraction and generalization from the facts observed in natural languages. A note- worthy aspect of Culioli™s position on this point is his acute awareness of the main danger of modelling, namely disconnection from facts. From the outset, he insists on the absolute necessity of keeping in touch with the genuine working of the languages considered so as to avoid the risk of distorting observed phenomena in order to make them fit into the Procrustes bed of theory. Consequently, each hypothesis will have to be tested by reverting to what actually happens in languages. ﬁLes representations de niveau 3 doivent etre dam une relation d™exteriorite par rapport au niveau 2 mais une ‚ext&ioritC engagee™ de sorte que le formel soit de I™empirique formalise et que l™empirique au fur et a mesure des gentralisations vienne mettre en question le formel.ﬂ (Culioli, 1987, reprinted 1990: 23) [‚Level 3 representations should be exterior to level 2 but exterior and linked at the same time, so that formal representations will be formalized empirical facts and empirical facts, all along the process of generalization, will bring into question formal representations.‚] It follows that, first, all linguistic studies should be based on the analysis of authentic contextualized utterances. This would enable linguists to avoid drawing conclusions from ad hoc utterances produced by themselves and unconsciously ignoring counter-examples. Of course, work on languages, whether foreign or not to the linguist should be controlled by native informants. On the other hand, the principles laid down for the analysis of Level 2 phenom- ena and the construction of the model reflect a holisric conception of language. There is no separate analysis of production and perception, any speaker having both to produce and perceive utterances. Besides, all observable facts should be accounted for, including slips of the tongue, misconstruction, ambiguity and metaphor. Last but not least, there is no separation between components: syntax is not separated from semantics and markers of operations can be syntactic, morpho- logical or phonetic, or combinations of these. [VI] ﬁI claim that we can provide a unified theory which will integrate phenomena which at present are treated separately in different sectors. Of course, such a goal forces one to take added p~aut~ons. But at the same time, it prevents one from limiting a field of research without giving explicit theoretical or technical justifications for such a decision. I am therefore arguing for a syntax which woutd be defined as a hypersyntax.ﬁ(Culioli, 1978, reprinted 1990: 73) 3. Some crucial concepts in the theory First of all, let us turn to the name given to Antoine Culioli™s theory: Theory of Enunciative Operations7 In this name, enunciative highlights the prominent place, in the theory, of the uttering Situation (Sit,) in which an utterance is con- structed by an enunciator (S,) at a moment of uttering (TO). As for operations, it refers to the formalized processes of construction of utterances from notional representations that divides Culioli™s linguistics from Benveniste™s. In the fol- lowing section, we shall give successive definitions of the concepts expressed by the terms enunciator, notian and operation of lacation, the basic operation at the root of all enunciative operations, then the model based on these concepts will be outlined and the main two topological representations used by Culioli will be examined. 3.1. Enunciator vs. speaker, co-enunciator vs. addressee or co-speaker 3.1.1. The concept of situation of uttering (Sit,) was evolved by Culioli out of Emile Benve~ste™s work on the specificity of the fmt person as central locator in deixis.8 7 In French Thiorie des Opkations Emnciatives. 8 ﬁCe sont les indicateurs de la deixis, demonstratifs, adverbes, adjectifs, qui organisent les relations spatiales et temporelles autour du ‚sujet™ pris comme rep&e: ‚ceci, ici, maintenant™ et leurs nombreuses correlations ‚cela, hier, l™an demier, demain™ etc.ﬂ (Benveniste, 1958, re-printed 1966: 262.) [‚D&is markers, demonstratives, adverbs, adjectives, express the organization of spatial and temporal relation- ships round the ‚subject™ working as locator: ‚this, here, now™ and their nume~us cotrelatives ‚that, yes- terday, last year, to-morrow™ etc.‚]. 162 M.-L. Groussier i Lingua 110 ~~~~ 157-182 Any utterance is produced by an enunciator9 (SO) at a specific moment, the moment of uttering (TO). The situation of uttering is the combination of an enunciator and a moment of uttering, which is symbolized by Sit, (SO, TO), Here is the definition of uttering according to Culioli: ﬁEnoncer, c™est con&mire un espace, orienter, determiner, etablir un mseau de valeurs referentielles, bref, un systeme de rep&age. Tout enonce est rep&e par rapport a une situation ~~nonci~ion qui est d&tie par rapport a un premier sujet enonciateur S, (l™un des deux sujets enonciateurs sans lesquels il n™y a pas d™enonciation) et a un temps d™enonciation Ts.ﬂ (Cuholi, 1975: 10) [‚Uttering is constructing a space, orienting, determining, establishing a network of referential values, in short, a system of location. Every utterance is located relative to an uttering situation which is deter- mined relative to a first enunciator-subject Se (one of the two enunciator-subjects without whom no utter- ing can take place) and a time of uttering T,.‚] 3.12. The terms, en~nciutor, speaker, co-enunciator and co-speaker/uddressee refer to different functions and should not be used as if they were s~onymous. 3.1.2.1. Speaker and co-speaker or addressee, corresponding to French locuteur and co-locuteur or interlocuteur are used, in the theory, to refer to ‚whoever speaks™ and ‚whoever is spoken to™ respectively. They refer to human beings in situations of speech but not to abstract coordinates in the situation of uttering. Besides, all the people who speak a language at a given moment can be referred to as its speakers (Fr. ses locuteurs). 3.1.2.2. ~n~~ciutor refers to an abstract function in the pr~uction of an utterance. The enunciator is the origin of all the successive choices that contribute in the con- struction of an utterance and make it unique. For instance, it is as enunciator that the speaker takes responsibilityi for his modal choices. The name co-enunciator will be given to the abstract function of the addressee as a necessary parameter in a situation of uttering, whose presence and relation to the enunciator will have a part to play in the construction of the utterance. For instance, in Indo-European languages, the co- enunciator will be referred to as such by second person pronouns which share with first person pronouns the function of shifters.ﬂ In a language like Japanese, the ™ There is greater homogeneity in Culioli™s original French metalanguage than in the English transla- tions which have been given of it either by Michel Liddle (ML) in Culioli (1995) or by Ronald Flintham (RF) in the English 1992 version of Bouscaren, Chuquet, Danon-Boileau (1987). Enonciureur is trans- lated by utterer (RF) and enunciator (ML), moment d™honciation by time of utterance (RF) and moment of uttering (ML), situation d™honciation by sitaafion of utterance (RF) and situafion of uttering (ML). The only term common to both translators is utterance for 6noncP. Though greater homogeneity is pre- served in R. Flintham™s translation, I have here adopted Michel Liddle™s terms simply for convenience™s sake, as Culioli (1995) may have been mom widely read than Bouscaten, Chuquet, Danon-Boileau (1992). lo The French phrase used by Culioli is prend en charge. I™ I thank John Anderson for pointing out to me that the word shifier may be used in a broader sense. I am using it here in what seems to be the original sense. In the passage of Languuge, its nature, devel- opment and origin where Jespersen first introduces the term, the pronoun instances of shifters he gives are only 1st and 2nd person pronouns. Roman Jakobson, taking up the word some 35 years later, also mentions 1st and 2nd person pronouns. Nicolas Ruwet, who translated some of Jakobson™s writings into French, chose to translate sh$ter by the noun embruyeur which, literally, means ‚the device that puts into M.-L. Groussier I Lingua 110 (2000) 157-182 163 socio-cultural status of the addressee is taken into account in the definition of the co- enunciator as it has a part to play in the construction of the utterance. Quotation turns the enunciator into a mere speaker since, in that case, he is not the origin of the choices in the construction of the utterance(s) that he quotes: (1) Tom said: ‚Stop at once, you bastard!™ Indirect speech appears when an enunciator appropriates, hence alters, the choices in the construction of another enunciator™s utterance: (1™) Tom told him to stop at once and called him a bastard. 3.2. The notion and the notional domain 3.2.1. Notions are representations belonging to Culioli™s Level 1. At this level, they are common to all the speakers of a language at a given time. They result from the cognitive processing of the extra-linguistic universe, a processing to which we do not have access. Culioli™s definition of notions runs as follows: ﬁLes notions [. .] sent des systtmes de representations complexes de proprietes physico-culturelles, c™est a dire des proprietds d™objet issues de manipulations ntcessairement prises a I™interieur de cultures et, de ce point de vue, parler de notions, c™est parler de problemes qui sont du ressort de disciplines qui ne peuvent pas etre ramenees uniquement a la linguistique.ﬁ(Culioli, 198 1, reprinted 1990: 50) [‚Notions [. .] are systems of complex representations of physico-cultural properties, i. e. properties belonging to objects and resulting from proceedings necessarily conditioned by cultures. In that respect, to speak of notions is to speak of problems pertaining to sciences which cannot be reduced to linguistics alone.‚]‚2 There is no one-to-one correspondance between notions and words. Yet, it is through words that we get some access (though imperfect) to notions. ﬁParler de notion, c™est parler d™un ensemble que I™on peut exprimer, par exemple, par ‚lire; lecture; livre; lecteur; bibliotheque etc.™ c™est a dire qu™on ne peut pas ramener les chases a une unite lexicale; celle-ci va servir de porte-manteau, d™entree, mais c™est tout.ﬂ (Culioli, 1981, reprinted 1990: 53-54) [‚Speaking of a notion is speaking of a whole that can be expressed, for instance, by read; reading; book; reader; library etc. That means the whole cannot be reduced to one lexical unit; the lexical unit will be used as a sort of coat-hanger, or as a means of access, but that is all.‚] gear™. Ruwet justifies his choice thus: ﬁLe mot embrayeur, qui est utilise dam le langage technique pour traduire certains des sens de (. . .) shifter, nous a paru propre a designer ces unites du code qui ‚embrayent™ le message sur la situationﬂ (N. Ruwet, traduction de Jakobson, Essais de Linguisrique g&+ale, Paris, Payot, note (3) p. 178) [‚The word embrayeur, used in technical vocabulary as a trans- lation for some of the meanings of shifter, seemed appropriate for those units in the code that gear the message to the situation™]. I2 The translation into English of the French word notion by the English word notion is not entirely sat- isfactory. Yet, in both languages, these terms should be taken for what they are: metalinguistic terms with stated definitions, neither of which should be confused with the same terms in common present-day French or English. This is an instance of the recurrent problem of the relationship between metalinguis- tic and plain linguistic meanings. 164 M.-L. Groussier i Lingua 110 (2000) 157-182 3.2. The ‚physico-cultural properties™ given by Culioli as the components of notions are also called by him proprie™tks primitives (‚primitive properties™). Exam- ples of primitive properties are /animate/, /non-animate/, /human/, /discrete/, /contin- uous/, /male/, /female/, /bounded/, /unbounded/ etc.13 3.2.1. The primitive properties associated to notions will have a part to play in the semantico-syntactic behaviour of the words referring to these notions. For instance, the association of the primitive properties /discrete/ or /continuous/ to some notions will result, in languages like English or French, in different compatibilities of nouns with determiners and the association of the primitive properties /bounded/ or /unbounded/ to process or state notions will result in different types of behaviour in verbs with regard to location in time and aspect. The impossibility to separate syn- tax from semantics finds particularly obvious justification here. 3.2.2. The primitive properties which are constituent of notions will define prim- itive relationships l4 between notions. Primitive relationships condition those com- patibilities between notions which result in compatibilities between words. For instance, in English, the acceptability of Chomsky™s famous sentence Colourless green ideas sleepfiriously can be questioned because no primitive relationships can be found between any of the notions referred to by the words. 3.2.3. Of course, primitive properties and so, notions, are language-specific. Thus, in English, the notional properties /male/, /female/ or /neither male nor female/ will have to be taken into account in the choice of anaphoric 3rd-person pronouns or of some nouns like titles and forms of polite address (Sir, Madam, Lady etc.), but in Japanese, there is no grammatical status for such a distinction (san will do for Eng- lish Mr and Mrs or Miss). In French, there is no word for English sibling and no way of referring to the notion ‚born of the same parents™ except by the words frPre (‚brother™) or soeur (‚sister™) which shows the notion ‚born of the same parents™ does not exist in French without addition of the gender properties /male/ or /female/. 3.2.4. Notions are not given phenomena but constructs. ﬁOn ne peut pas construire de figures sans dCtenniner et dklimiter: omnis determinatio est negatioﬂ(Culioli, 1988, reprinted 1990: 103) [‚Representations cannot be built without being determined and circumscribed: omnis determinatio est negatio™]15 I3 I thank the anonymous reviewer for drawing my attention to the similarity between Culioli™s analy- sis and decomposition. The theory of primitive properties of course implies a kind of decomposition, not unlike the lexical decomposition of Role and Reference Grammar described by Van VaIin and LaPolla (1997: 91), as ﬁjust fine-grained enough (and no more) to make the distinctions necessary for capturing linguistically significant generalizations about syntax, semantics and their interactionﬂ. Yet, this similar- ity with RRG should not obscure deep differences. Culioli would never speak of interaction between syntax and semantics because, for him, these are not distinct components. Besides, there is no equivalent in Culioli™s analyses of the lexical representutions of RRG. CulioIi aims at a metalanguage in which primitive properties and relations would not be expressed in the words of any particular language, hence his rejection of paraphrases for combinations of elementary relations and operations. l4 French relations primitives. I5 The Latin quotation is from Spinoza. ‚*Se heurter au problemme de la notion, c™est done rencontrer d™un cot& les faisceaux de proprietts phy- sico-culturelles ou proprietes d™objet (d™organisation) et d™un autre c&e, par le biais des marqueurs d™assertion (...), de negation, d™interrogation, le probltme de la construction d™un complementaire.ﬂ (Culioli, 1981, reprinted 1990: 52) [‚Coming up against the problem of notions is meeting, on the one hand, bundles of physico-cultural properties, i. e. properties of an object (organisational properties) and on the other hand, through the markers of assertion, negation, interrogation, the problem of how to construct a complementJ™h.™ In short, notions confront us with the problem of identity versus otherness. Culioli™s domaine notionnet (‚notional domain™) is an attempt to solve that problem by inte- grating relations of identity and otherness in the metalinguistic representation of the notion. A notion is not only defined by what it is (identity) but also by what it is not (otherness). 3.2.4.1. Of course, notions do not emerge as such in linguistic phenomena: they emerge as occurrences, that is, as mentions of the notion in a specific context. For instance, in the utterance (2) The mouse ran down the clock. the nouns mouse and clock and the verb ran refer to occurrences of, respectively, the notions ‚mouse™, ‚clock™ and ‚run™. Here is what Culioli says about occurrences of notions : ﬁA notional domain is the domain of the occurrences of a notionﬂ (Culioii, 1995: 47)ﬂ ﬁOne only encounters notions through occurrences. We do not study activity as it appears through non verbal behaviour, but only through verbalized behaviour. (. . .) For example, 1 could say ‚this is a satchel™ and someone could say to me: ‚I would call it a briefcase; satchel is more for schoolboys™. One can remark that at every moment in discourse, expressions arise such as: I™m looking for words that can express my thought, if I can put it that way, etc. which show a preoccupation with adjustment. This happens through occurrences of notions.ﬁ(Culioli, 1995: 41)‚ﬂ Thus, occurrences are not all equally representative of the properties defining the notion. ﬂ The mathematical definition of the complement runs thus: ﬁLet S be a set of elements with the prop- erty P ((x I P(x)}), the complement S of S is the set of all the elements that are not members of S.ﬂ Culioli adapted the mathematical concept of ‚complement™ to his own theory of the notion, contending that a notion (others would say concept) is not merely definable in terms of ‚what it is™ but also and CN- cially in terms of ‚what it is not™, that is, the complement of ‚what it is™ (for the theory of the notional domain and a more detailed de~nition of the complement see below 3.5. I. and note 68) I7 The original of this translation by Michel Liddle is: ﬁLe domaine notiomtel est done le domaine d™occurrences d™une notionﬂ (Culioli, 1985: 28). Ix The French original in Culioli (1985: 25-26) is: ﬁNous n™apprehendons les notions qu™8 travers des occurrences. Nous n™etudions pas l™activite cognitive telle qu™elle peut nous apparaitre au travers des conduites non-verbales mais a travers des conduites qui sont toujours verbal&es. (. .) Par exemple, je pourrais dire ‚Ceci est un cartable™ et quelqu™un me dirait: ‚J™appellerais plutot ca une serviette; cartable, 9a fait plutot Ccolier™. Vous vous apercevez qu™a chaque instant dam votre dis- tours, vous avez des expressions du genre: ‚je cherche les mots qui conviendraient a ma pensee™, ‚si je puis dire™ etc. . . qui marquent un souci d™ajustement. Cela passe par des occurrences de la notionﬂ. 166 M.-L. Groussier I Lingua 110 (2000) 157-182 3.2.4.2. A notional domain is constructed around a typical occurrence called the organizing centre.‚9 The definition of the typical occurrence fits exactly the defini- tion of the notion, which means that it includes all of the defining properties associ- ated in the notion and only those. The class of occurrences will be constructed by identification with the organizing centre. This operation will result in different degrees of identity. According to the degree of identity between the properties of each occurrence and the properties of the type, occurrences will be grouped along a gradient. Occurrences identical or nearly identical to the type will be grouped near the organizing centre and occurrences with less properties in common with the type will be grouped in order of decreasing iden- tity and increasing otherness from the centre down.*O Occurrences with enough sig- nificant properties in common with the centre will be defined as belonging to the Inte- rior of the notional domain. Occurrences that have no significant properties in common with the centre will be defined as belonging to the Exterior of the notional domain. Some properties are crucial in that their absence is enough to exclude an occurrence from the Interior of a given notional domain. For instance, in the above quotation, the property ‚used by schoolboys™ was considered crucially significant for an occurrence to belong to the Interior of the domain of the notion ‚satchel™. 3.2.4.3. Between the Interior and the Exterior of the notional domain there is, of course, a boundary. But the relationship between the Interior and the Exterior is not such that the boundary could be represented as a line dividing the last occurrence of the Interior from the first occurrence of the Exterior. Such extreme occurrences do not exist. The Boundary is actually better represented as the zone in which the less typical occurrences of the Interior overlap with those occurrences of the Exterior which have some properties in common with them. This zone is not stable and will vary with speakers whereas, at a given moment in the history of a language, speak- ers are supposed to agree about typical occurrences. *™ For instance, a zoologist will call a Shetland pony a horse whereas somebody used to riding Anglo-Arab horses may be reluctant to do so. That means the representation of the Shetland pony is far enough from the typical horse to belong to the Boundary. Yet, both will agree that the representation of the animal called girufle does not belong either to the Interior or the Boundary of the domain of the notion ‚horse™ but, definitely, to the Exterior. Interior ~~-)-t)_)-)-)-[)~~~~~~-~-~_~~ Organizing First doubtful Last doubtful centre occurrence of Exterior occurrence of Interior Fig. 1. The notional domain. I9 In French centre organisateur. *O This recalls Eleanor Rosch™s typicality gradient. *I Without that agreement, no mutual comprehension between speakers would be possible. On the other hand, without possible disagreement about the boundary, there would be no possibility of misun- derstanding, ambiguity or debate on the meaning of a word, all of which sharply divide natural lan- guages from artificial ones. M.-L. Groussier J Lingua 110 {.X&30) JV-18.2 I67 In short, the Boundary is made up of occurrences whose identification with the orga- nizing centre may be attempted but whose identity with it is most questionable. 3.2.4.4. For a given notional domain, another kind of centre can be constructed, namely, the attractor or attracting centre. 22 The attractor can be defined as ‚the peak of™ the notion, that is an imaginary occurrence in which all the constituent properties of the notion would be brought to the highest degree imaginable. Reference to the attractor is often found in ~tensification and has hyperbolic value. For instance? the pronoun somebody literally refers to ‚a human being™ so that it is identifiable with the organizing centre of the notion ‚human being™. But if it is used with focalizing prosody it can mean ‚what is most distinguished as far as human beings are con- cerned™ and thus refers to the attracting centre. (3) He™s somebody! (Culioli, 1995: 59)23 First of all, it should be stressed that the word location refers to an abstract oper- ation, location in space being only one among several kinds of location. 3.3.1. Definition. Let us consider two terms, X and Y. If Y is more determined, i. e. more specific, 24 than X, the degree of determination of X can be increased by locating X relative to Y. Then X will be the hated term and Y the locator.25 This can be written X E Y which reads ‚X is located relative to Y™.26 If the first2? term is the locator and the second term the located term, then, we shall have the converse operation: Y 2 X which reads ‚Y is the locator of X™.28 The symbol 5 is cafled epsilon and 3 epsilon mirror.29 3.3.2. The operation of location can be established between terms belonging to any notional field. Of course, the terms can represent spatial entities. In (4), the loca- tor is ‚London™ and the located term ‚the Dartford Tunnel™: 22 In French attracteur and centre attracteur. 21 In the French original (Culioli, 1985: 39) it was C™est que&u™un I. *™ it seems hardly necessary to point out that more specific, here, means ‚less general™. This applies - as far as language is concerned - on two levels. (1) The production of utterances is the combination of operations through which an individual enunciator in a unique uttering situation produces a unique utter- ance out of elements drawn from notional representations and informed according to rules common to all the speakers of the language at the moment of uttering. This results in the specificity gradient as cre- ated by dete~iuat~on operations. (2) Among notional representations, some am more specific (or less general) than others whenever there is a more or less taxonomic hierarchy of notions. For instance, the notion ‚parsnip™ is more specific than the notion ‚vegetable™. z5 In French, the operation of location is called rep&age, the located term rep&P and the locator rep&-e. 2h In French: ‚X est rep&& par rapport 2 Y™. 27 Of course, this has nothing to do with the order of words: it is an abstract order, as appears in the example from Latin below. 2x In French, ‚Y est le re#rc de X™. 2v In French e@~n miroir. 168 M.-L. Groussier t Ling~u I10 ~~~~ 151-182 (4) The Dartford Tunnel is east of London This can only be said to somebody who knows where London is (higher determina- tion of the locator) and does not know where the tunnel is. After the operation of location, the located entity has a higher degree of determination than before. Here, the co-speaker finally knows where the Dartford Tunnel is. Yet, location is not con- fined to space. In (5), the locator is designated by Peter and the located term by &his house : (5) This house belongs to Peter The relation ‚be located relative to™ (E) thus established is not spatial: it is purely qualitative and increases the degree of determination of the located term by making it unique among the elements of its class (the class HOUSE). In (6), Peter still des- ignates the locator and this house the located term, but the relation established is ‚be the locator of™ (1),30 expressed by the verb own, a variant of have: (6) Peter owns this house 3.3.3. There are three possible values for location. 3.3.1. Location established between radically d.$erent terms is, for instance, what happens in spatial location: even after the operation has taken place, the located term remains completely distinct from the locator. It is also the case in the example of non-spatial location given above. These are both instances of dissymmetric location or differentiation. The converse relation ‚be the locator of™ (2) is mandatory after permutation of the terms in all cases of d&symmetric location. 3.3.3.2. The other value of location is ident~~cati~n. In such a case, the result is identj~ of the located term with the locator. For instance, in (7), that Zady designates the located term and Peter™s grundmut~er the locator. Here, ‚be located relative to™ takes on the value ‚be identified with™.3L 3o Culioli™s operation of location is not without analogies with Langacker™s relutionui predication between a trujector and a landmark. Yet, the scope of the operation of location seems to be wider. Unlike the word trujector, the word rep&6 (located term) does not refer to a function whose prototype would be an object moving through space and a figure (in contrast with a ground). 31 When he invented the symbol 5, Culioli had in mind the Boolean symbol for ‚be member of (a set)‚. As ‚be member of™ is only one case of location among others, he underlined his epsilon to distinguish it from the Boolean symbol. At the same time, the underlining served as a reminder that identification (oth- erwise symbolized by =) is among the values of location: ﬁayant affaire a des valeurs indistinguables, en composant I™appartenance E, I™inclusion c, et I™identification = (qui joue un t&s grand role darts les langues), on obtient le symbole epsilonﬂ (Culioli, 1981, re-printed in Culioli, 1990: 47). [‚as we have to deal with indistiguishable values, combining membership of a set E , inclusion c, and identification = (which plays a considerable part in languages), resuhed in the epsilon symbot.ﬁ] In Culioli (1993, the underlining has unfortunately been omitted. M.-L. Groussier I Lingua I10 (2000) 151-182 I69 (7) That lady is Peter™s grandmother It should be noted that, when the value of 5 is identification, the terms of the rela- tion can be permutated without changing the operator to 2. The relation established remains ‚is located relative to™, in that case ‚is identified with™ whatever the order of the terms. For instance, the above quotation could be turned into (7™) (7™) Peter™s grandmother is that lady.32 3.3.3.3. A third value must be added to the list: absence of location noted & or w. This value is also called disconnection (Fr. de™crochage) and applies to the cases when no location is possible between two terms, for instance, between the plane of fiction and the plane of validity (see 3.4.3.2. below). Another instance is the 3rd per- son plural pronoun in English: within the system of 3rd person pronouns, it stands apart as far as the category of gender is concerned so that its location relative to the other three pronouns has the value o. 3.3.4. ‚Be™ and ‚have™. In the languages where these verbs exist, verbs meaning ‚be™ are, among other things, markers of location operations of the form E ‚is located relative to™, and verbs meaning ‚have™ are, among other things, markers of the con- verse operation 1 ‚is the locator of™ as appears in (6) above. This allows a formalized metalinguistic representation (Level 3) of Benveniste™s intuitions about those verbs3ﬂ For instance, the examples from Latin given by Benveniste can be repre- sented in the following way: let ‚petunia™ =S a and ‚ego™ + b, then nisi est p~cu- nia corresponds to the metalinguistic operation: a 5 b, the dative mihi labelling that word as referring to the locator. That the order of words should place b first, then a, is irrelevant. As for habeo pecuniam, the metalinguistic representation, in Culioli™s notation, is b 2 a, i. e. ‚b is the locator of a™. Now, as far as markers are concerned, b is not expressed by a separate word but implied by the ending -0 in the form habeo which, thus, stands for ‚b 2™ in the metalinguistic formula. The accusative in pecu- niam labels the noun as expressing the second argument of the predicate habeo. The relation predicated being ‚be the locator of™, pecuniam thus can be construed as expressing the located term. 3.4. An outline of the enunciative model 3.4.1. Nature and place of the model In Quotations [IJ and [II], ‚Level 3™ is the name given by Culioli to the sequence of concatenated metalinguistic operations worked out by the linguist as a representa- x This does not mean, of course, that the two utterances are exactly equivalent. As far as enunciative determination is concerned, in (7), the topicalized element is That lady whereas in (7™) it is Peter™s grundmother. 33 Benveniste, 1966: 187-20™7. He writes: ﬁavoir n™est rien autre qu™un .&re 2r inverk: mihi est pecu- niu se retoume en habeo pecuniamﬂ (1966: 197) [‚have is nothing more than reversed be(long) to: mihi est pectcnia can be reversed into habeo pecuniam™.] 170 M.-L. Groussier I Lingua II0 (2000) 157482 tion of what ‚leads us from 1 to 2™. The term level itself is misleading as it calls to mind the idea of successive stages in a transformational process. Yet in this particu- lar case, it should not be taken in that sense. The numbers distinguishing the levels do not express an order of production but rather a degree of proximity to Level 1 as a primary level. Level 2 comes second because it stems from Level 1, and therefore implies its anteriority, being made up of the properly linguistic material representa- tions of the results of Level 1 operations. As for Level 3, it comes third because it is built up on Levels 1 and 2 thus implying their anterior@. But this anteriority is not homogeneous with that of Level 1 relative to Level 2 as it is the anteriority of data to the interpretation given by an observer. As a sequence of concatenated representations of operations, Level 3 is akin to a generative mode1.34 Yet, two differences separate it radically from Chomskyan grammar. First, the model is not supposed to reflect the workings of the mind. We saw how carefully Culioli stresses the fact that we have limited access to Level 1 and no access at all to the preceding cognitive level. So, Level 3 is based upon and conse- quently made up of hypotheses, the only observable facts being the markers at Level 2. Of course, whenever possible, the hypotheses at Level 3 take into account the dis- coveries of cognitive psychology, 35 but they do not belong to psychology. This cau- tion concerning the possible relationship between the operations at Level 3 and men- tal operations also sharply divides Culioli™s model from that of the Guillaumian schooP6 and, in some measure, from Langacker whose cognitive linguistics is other- wise not without common points with Culioli™s theory.37 The second difference with the Chomskyan model is also crucial. In generative grammar, as in mathematical computation, each line of the algorithm is the result of the previous line and only the ultimate result is represented in the speech-chain. On the contrary, in Culioli™s model, operations accumulate without necessarily can- celling the results of preceding operations and two stages of the model can be repre- sented by one given marker. For instance, a verbal form both expresses a notional 34 As Milner (1992) points out: ﬁOn peut done tenir que le formalisme culiolien fait partie de la famille des formalismes transformatiomrelsﬂ [‚It may therefore be argued that Culiolian formalism belongs to the family of transformational formalisms™.]. 3s Culioli studied all of Jean Piaget™s research on cognitive psychology and worked for years with cog- nitive psychologist Fran9ois Bresson. His caution about the possible connections of levels 1 and 3 and cognition precisely stems from the fact that his knowledge of cognitive psychology is far more extensive than that of most linguists. His attitude to that science comes from his constant care to avoid encroach- ments between sciences. Cognitive psychology should be known by the linguist but its methods and aims are different from those of linguistics. Therefore, it is as dangerous for a linguist to believe his science gives him full access to the workings of the mind as for a psychologist to believe his gives him full access ot the workings of language. 36 Also named ‚Psychomecanique du langage™ [‚Psychomechanics of language™] and based on the work of French linguist Gustave Guillaume (1883-1960). The main representative of that school nowadays is Andre Joly. Another branch of the school has Bernard Pottier as its leader. The Guillaumian model has one feature in common with the Culiolian one: it is also an enunciative model. 37 The common points were highlighted by Michel Liddle, the translator of Culioli™s 198&1985 lec- tures in his commentary on Culioli™s theory (Culioli, 1995). value and acts as predicate. Hence the impossibility of separating syntax from semantics. In order to avoid confusion between the three levels established by Culioli and the levels of the model, we shall here call the latter stages. It should be clear that these stages are both stages of production and stages of reconstruction of the production process on the perception side. The numbing chosen here will reflect the order of production. 3.4.2. The lexis schema and predication The first stage of the model is the stage of choice among notions and instantiation of the lexis schema. Any utterance stems, in the first place, from a basic predication pattern including a relation and two arguments. This is called the lexis schemaj™ and has the form: In the lexis schema, &,, and 5, are the two places for arguments and rt is the place for the relation. The relation being oriented, the indices 0 and 1 mean that \,, is the place for the source-argument and 5, the place for the goal-argument. The order of the schema is intended to remind the reader that the relation is an abstract relation whose outcome as an utterance in a given language will not necessarily have the form ‚argument-predicate~argument™ as is the case in English or in French : 39 ‚*<&,, k,, ID qui se lit: premier argument (ou point de depart de la relation), deuxitme argument (ou point d™arrivee de la relation) et predicat (ou relation entre les deux points).ﬂ (Culioh, Fuchs, Pecheux 1970: 24). [‚<&,, 5,. rt> which reads: first proposition (or starting point of the relationship), second proposition (or finishing point of the relationship), and predicate (or relationship between the two points).™ Transia- tion by M. Liddle in Culioli, 1995: 801 In order to become a specific predicative pattern, the lexis schema has to be instantiated: the three places have to be filled with notions. The notion filling the rt place has to be a relational notion. The condition for notions to fill a lexis schema is that they include compatible primitive properties 4o that will create primitive rela- tionships between them. In this case let the place of the relation be filled by the First introduced in Cutioli et al., 1970. I9 The lexis schema has a form reminiscent of a binary predicate in predicate logic, as could be expected from a linguist who took pains to work in close contact with logicians. Yet, two differences should be noted: (I) In predicate logic, the relation is generally written before the arguments (r x y ) instead of after. (2) Indices are assigned to the arguments of the lexis schema. These two differences show that the lexis schema, though related to predicate logic, is nor predicate logic. The indices are the essential difference: they mean that the relation is always asymmetric and the order of the arguments is the crucial point. Another good example of adaptation to linguistics of mathematical concepts (see below note 67). On predicate logic, see Jean-Blaise Grize (1967). ﬁ) For a definition of primitive properties, see above 3.2.2. 172 M.-L. Groussier I Lingua 110 (2000) 157-182 notion ‚catch™41, the place of the source-argument by the notion ‚cat™ and the place of the goal-argument by the notion ‚ball™. The notion ‚catch™ includes, among other properties, a primitive relationship between an Agent (the ‚catcher™) and a Patient (the ‚caught entity™). This primitive relationship is oriented from the Agent, as acti- vator of the process, to the Patient. Therefore, the 5s place will have to be instanti- ated with a notion including the property /animate/ mandatorily associated with an Agent. There is no absolute animacy constraint on the 5, place though the notion instantiating it should include the property ‚mobile™. Now, each of the notions ‚cat™ and ‚ball™ has the required properties to fill one of the argument places. The choice of ‚cat™ for &, results from the property /animate/ and ‚ball™ will instantiate 5, which does not require animacy. The result is an instantiated lexis-pattern: <‚cat™, ‚ball™, ‚catch™> The second stage is the stage of predication. Once the lexis-pattern is instantiated, predication can take place, that is, the enunciator can relate the first term to the sec- ond by means of the relational notion. Predication yields the predicated lexis (1) or predicative relation, in this case: (8) (‚cat™ ‚catch™ ‚ball™) In this predicative pattern, ‚cat™ is the first argument, ‚catch™ is the predicate, ‚ball™ is the second argument. The predicated lexis is not an utterance, only an utterable pattern4* from which a family of utterances can be generated. Each of these utter- ances will be different in some way from the others but they all belong to the same paraphrastic family. 3.4.3. Enunciative locations The next and third stage in the construction of an individual utterance is the enun- ciative stage. The arguments and predicate in the predicated lexis are not, so far, determined beyond mere notional choice. Their determination is thus purely qualita- tive and the involved notions have not yet undergone the location operations that will turn the utterable pattern into a singular utterance with a referential value. This is where the situation of uttering43 comes in: the arguments and predicate of the predicative relation will now be determined by location44 relative to one or both of the parameters of the situation of uttering, that is, referential values will be con- structed for them. 4™ Though, as was pointed out earlier, there is no one-to-one relationship between words and notions, our only access to notions is through words. Therefore, using words between quotation marks to repre- sent notions is simplistic and unsatisfactory but the only device available. 42 In French un dnon~able as opposed to un &oncC (= an utterance). This recalls the Iekton of Stoic grammarians (‚the thing to be said™). 43 See above 3.1.1. 44 For the definition of the operation of location, see above, 3.3.1. M.-L. Groussier I Lingua 110 (2000) 157-182 173 3.4.3.1. Argument notions. The notions instantiating the places of arguments will be located relative to the enunciator or the moment of uttering and/or the whole of the situation of uttering, which will result in varying degrees of specificity (determi- nation). Notions will react differently to those operations of location according to the primitive properties associated with them, e.g. in (8), ‚cat™ and ‚ball™ are both notions with the property /discrete/. Four operations can be carried out on these notions. all operations of location or combinations of such operations. l First, construction of a class of occurrences of the notion: the class of occur- rences is constructed by locating the notion relative to the class of situations.45 Since the notion ‚cat™ includes the property /discrete/, location relative to the class of situ- ations will yield a class of individual elements, each of which will qualitatively be identified to the notional definition. This operation of construction of the class of occurrences (a combination of two locations) is not quantification but makes quan- tification possible, hence its name of quantifiahilization. In English, the marker of reference to the class is W: e. g. cats, in French LEs-----S, e. g. les chats. l The second operation isolates one or several elements from the class by location relative to a specific situation. Qualitatively, the element is identified again to the notion, but location relative to a specific situation makes quantification mandatory: the enunciator has to choose between ‚one™ and ‚more than one™. This operation is called extraction. In English, the markers of this operation are A---@ or @--S e.g. a cat / cats. In French, extraction is marked by UN(EM, or DE,- e. g. un chat I des chats. l Another operation of location can be added to quantifiabilisation and extraction: for instance, a single element isolated from the class of cats is located again, this time directly relative to the situation of uttering by identification with one element of it or of the context. This is the operation called pinpointinR,4h expressed, in English. by the use of the definite article, demonstratives or genitives combined with both numbers, e. g. the I that I my cut. In French, the equivalent markers can be found except the genitives, replaced by possessive adjectives: le i cc I mon chat. l The fourth operation is called scanning. 47 It does not follow pinpointing as pin- pointing does extraction. It rather takes place instead of extraction. In scanning the enunciator is represented as going over all the occurrences of a class or set,ﬁ* one by one, without ever stopping either because they are all acceptable or because none of them is acceptable. In English, scanning is often marked on nouns by CWZJJ----@, e. g. any cut . In French, the equivalent of English an-4 is tout(eM e. g. tout r.hut.49 Js See also 3.2.4. above. 4h The names of the three operations in French are qmnfifiahilisation, cwfracrion andflf™chage. 47 In French parcours. 4X A class may be defined as an infinite set. Class belongs to the vocabulary of logic, set to the vocab- ulary of Boolean mathematics. Here, set is used with the meaning ‚finite set™. 4y Scanning can also be carried out on the class of possible moments. It is then expressed in English by ever when all moments are acceptable, never when no moment is found acceptable. In these cases, French has (Ne) jumais. 174 M.-L. Groussier I Lingua 110 (2000) 157-182 3.4.3.2. Predicate notions l Voice will be a consequence of the degree of determination of the arguments. In the active voice, the notional order of the terms of the primitive relationship, which results in the first term instantiating the &, place and the second the &r place of the lexis-schema, is kept in the predicated lexis. Therefore, the 5s term becomes the first argument and the 5, term becomes the second argument. (9) The cat caught the ball. But in a language like present-day English or French, among others, for the predi- cated lexis to become an utterance, the source-argument of the predicative relation has to be sufficiently determined to be thematized and act as starting-point5™ of the utterance. That means it should be easily identifiable for the co-enunciator to know ‚what the utterance is about™. If the first argument fulfils this condition, as in (9), that means it is located relative to the situation of uttering so that the rest of the predi- cated lexis is conferred a referential value by being located relative to it.51 However, when the first argument of the predicated lexis does not fulfil the determination requirement, for instance, when it is left unspecified, it is excluded from the pred- icative pattern, the second argument then becomes the starting-point and the verb is passivized. This interpretation of passivization has, of course, the advantage of high- lighting the fact that an active sentence and its passive counterpart, though stemming from the same lexis, do not convey the same message and cannot be used in the same situation.52 When the first argument of the predicated lexis is not determined enough to pro- vide the starting-point of the utterance, and there is no second argument, the first argument can be explicitly located relative to the uttering situation, which, thus, becomes the starting-point. This gives an utterance beginning with a predication of existence. Compare (10) and (10™): (10) * A mouse is in the piano. (10™) There™s a mouse in the piano.53 so French terme de dbparr, or theme. The English word topic is also used in this sense. In English and French, the topic is often the first element of the utterance. In Japanese, the theme is the noun marked by the postposition wa. ‚I This could be represented as: I a E Sit,, & a 1 (( ) rb) which reads ‚a is located relative to the situation of uttering, then identified with a which becomes the locator of rb™. Q For instance, the passive statement The lock has been tampered wirh, uttered by the victim of a bur- glary, has no active equivalent. *Somebody has tampered with the lock, though syntactically well- formed, is not acceptable for 2 reasons: (1) It topicalizes the less determined argument. (2) As the topi- calized argument refers to the role of Agent, the action as such takes precedence over the result so that the verb should be in the preterite instead of the present-perfect. 53 An anonymous reviewer considered that (10) A mouse is in the piano ‚is OK in English™, thus appearing at variance with the British and American informants I consulted on the point. The problem is M.-L. Groussier I Lingua 110 (2000) 157-182 17.5 Here, Culioli analyses there as standing for the situation as locator. The utterance could be paraphrased: ‚The situation includes a mouse in the piano™.54 The predicate of the predicated lexis will be conferred quantitative determination by being located in time and qualitative determination by being located relative to the enunciator. Location of the predicated lexis relative to the temporal origin TO will result in temporal determination. To be more precise, the moment coincident with the event referred to (T,) is located relative to the moment of uttering. When the location is identification, the two moments are coincident (T, = TO) and the verb will be in the present as in (7) or (10™). If, on the other hand, the location is dissymmet- ric, it will result in difSerentiution of T, from TO (T, # TO) and the verb will be in the pasG5 as in (9). l Two enunciative determinations of the predicated relation result from location relative to the enunciator. One is modality, the other is aspect. Modality consists, for the enunciator, in stating what are, in his eyes (he is the locator) the degree and conditions of validity of the predicated lexis. Culioli has devoted a lot of his time and attention to modal problems. He repeatedly insists that modality in natural language should not be treated in terms of logical truth value but in terms of validity. Validity means ‚the enunciator chooses to convey that he thinks what the predicated lexis refers to is the case56 or not™. Let p/p™ be the notional domains7 corresponding to the predicated lexis (h) con- sidered as a complex notion. This notional domain can be situated in three different planes:58 m the pre-modal plane, there is no modal choice between p (Interior) and p™ (Exterior). In the plane of validation or Assertion, a choice can be made or refused between p and p™ according to what the enunciator considers to be a fact. The enun- ciator™s choice is supposed to be constrained by the need to construct a referential value. The third plane is the plane offiction. In that plane, the choice of the enunci- ator is supposed to be free from the constraints of reference.s9 Modal choice entails specification of two quantities: (1) the distance d, between the plane of pre-modal indetermination and the plane of validation. (2) the distance d of the value selected in the notional domain of the lexis to the organizing centre of actually a fundamental difference in theories of acceptability. The reviewer, who accepts (IO) probably takes into account syntactic well-fomredness only. As far as I am concerned, following Culioli, I con- sider that acceptability judgements cannot be passed without taking into account the uttering situation and acceptable utterances are what a native speaker would acrzu~lly say in the situation. 1 doubt the reviewer, hearing characteristic noises inside his/her piano, would spontaneously exclaim A mouse is in the piano! instead of There™s a mouse in the piano!. Such is, for me, the only valid criterion of accept- ability. s4 The French Ii y a can be analysed along the same lines, both il and y standing for the situation. The paraphrase of II y a une souris duns le piano would then be ‚The situation has in it a mouse in the piano™. s5 The future does not count in this case as it belongs to modality, not to temporal location. sh French est le cas, the phrase commonly used by Culioli to express validity. s7 For the theory of the notional domain, see above 3.2. 5X For graphs representing some of the planes, see Fig. 3. s9 That is why Culioli often says the plane of fiction is disconnected (Fr.dkrocht) from the plane of validation. Location of the plane of fiction relative to the plane of validation yields the value O. Cf. above, 3.3.3.3. 176 M.-L. Groussier I Lingua II0 (2000) 157-182 the notional domain, i.e. its place on the gradient from the organizing centre to the exterior through the boundary. This gives the degree of validity. Culioli distinguishes four orders of modality. All fundamental modalities are grouped in the first order. No utterance is without one of these. First order modali- ties are all the cases when the enunciator expresses either his choice between valid- ity of h and non-validity, or impossibility of choice, without any intermediate case. When the enunciator™s choice is given as motivated by facts, we have either positive assertion or negative assertion. 6o The enunciator takes responsibility for the choice. Interrogation is the modality when the enunciator, both declares impossibility of choice and calls upon his co-enunciator to choose. First order modalities also include the case when the enunciator™s choice is given as disconnected from facts, i. e. hypo- thetical modality. 6™ Lastly, the enunciator may choose between the Interior and the Exterior of 3L and, through his utterance, bring about or try to bring about the extralinguistic event that will validate his choice. These are performative and injunc- tive modalities. In the performative case, the utterance itself is the event validating the choice, in the injunctive case, the utterance aims at triggering production of the event by the co-enunciator. In first order modalities, d, is null and d is 0 (validation) or 1 (non-validation), except in interrogation when no choice is made. Second order modalities roughly correspond to what other linguists call epistemic modalities. Unlike first order modalities, they are cases when there remains a gap (Fr. hiatus) between the pre-modal plane and the plane of validation (d, is not null) and the enunciator does not make an all-or-none choice between validity and non- validity, but as with assertion, 2nd order modalities are supposed to be based on ‚what the enunciator kr~ows™.~~ Like assertion too, second order modalities bear on the whole of 1. Second order modalities are prospective validation,63 possibility, probability and contingency. Third order modalities are evaluative modalities. Location of h relative to the enunciator takes the form of valuation of h by the enunciator (‚For me, h is . . . ‚). There are two kinds of evaluative modality. The enunciator can qualify h by either identifying it with what he expects or not, as in It™s normal lstrange that A. In the other case, the enunciator can identify h with what he wishes or not, as in It™s good / nice / stupid / unfortunate that i. In all cases, the qualifying judgement entails tak- ing into account both the validity and non-validity of h since it implies that actual validation could have been non-validation and vice-versa. 6o In English, assertion simply translates the French uj%-rmation while there is no word for the French assertion meaning: ‚indication of choice between validity and non-validity™. Here, the translations are those used by Ronald Flintham in his 1992 English version of Bouscaren et al. (1987) and, after him, by Michel Liddle in Culioli (1995). ﬂ See above, note 59 and 3.3.3.3. ‚* Hence the use of the word epistemic by many linguists for these modalities. The rejection of the word by Culioli is motivated by the often wide variation in its use. 63 Called vi&e by Culioli. Hence the classification of what is sometimes called future tense among modal, not temporal determinations. One of the consequences is that temporal differentiation (location relative to To) does not apply to the future, only to the past. M.-L. Groussier I Lingua I10 (2000) 157-182 117 Fourth order modalities are also called modalities of the subject. They roughly correspond to what other linguists call radical modalitiesa In fourth order modali- ties the conditions and degree of validity of h depend in various ways on the subject of the utterance. In volition, the subject of the utterance, mandatorily human, either values h positively or not, and accordingly, chooses prospective validation or not. which results in projection of the validation of h (Interior) or of the non-validation of h (Exterior) into the future. In deontic modality, the subject of the utterance is submitted to a constraint emanating either from the enunciator or from another source, which aims at bringing about validation or non-validation of h in the future. The remaining two modalities of the subject do not result in prospective validation of h. Capacity is the property of the subject that entails validation is possible. When capacity is conferred to the subject by the enunciator lifting prohibition on valida- tion, the modality is permission which entails validation is just contingent. In fourth order modalities, like second order modalities, d, is not null. Aspect is very close to modality in so far as this determination of the predicated lexis also consists in location relative to the enunciator,65 the word aspect meaning ‚point of view™ (of the enunciator). The enunciator considers the predicate as refer- ring to an occurrence of a process or state coincident with an interval, and will choose to focus on one part of the topological structure of the interval. Adjacent state l-1 first second boundary boundary Fig. 2. Topological structure of the interval. For instance, the part taken into account can be the first boundary (inchoative aspect) or the second (perfective aspect) or the interior as an open space (continuous aspect in English) or the adjacent state (resultative aspect). In other cases the enunciator may not have any special point of view, which means he does not take into account the heterogeneity between the boundaries and the interior, so that the occurrence is represented as a compact whole. This is the aoristic aspect, marked, in Present-Day English, by the simple forms as in, for instance, He jumped and, in Ancient Greek, by the aorist tense. @ The rejection of radical by Culioli is, again, motivated by the relative opacity of the term. In modul- ities of the subject, subject, or subject of the utterance (French sujet de Z™hnonce™) does not mean ‚gram- matical subject™. In fact, it means ‚first argument of the active predicate™, i. e. the argument resulting from the instantiation of the &, place of the lexis schema. It was named subject on account of the fact that the case when the property /human/ is associated to this term has prototypical value, but there are possible extensions to terms with the property /non-human/. 65 This, of course, is aspect as a determination of the predicate, not as a property of some notions (lex- ical aspect). 178 M.-L. Groussier i Lingua 110 (.?000f 157-182 3.5. Topology in Culioli™s metalanguage It should be obvious, by now, that topology plays a central role in Ct.&oh™s the- ory as a means of representation of Level III operations. The main two topological models used are the closed space model and the branching path model. 3.5.1. The closed space model is used for the representation of the notional domain, with its Interior, Exterior and Boundary and the concept of ‚complement™ of a given part. Yet, on several occasions, Culioli warns that the word complement66 should not be taken in its mathematical meaning. In that sense, the complement of the Interior is the Exterior and the Boundary, and the complement of the Exterior the Interior and the Boundary. Yet this definition of the complement is not satisfactory when one considers how natural languages work. This is what incited Culioli to cre- ate the concept of linguistic complement. 67 The linguistic complement of the Interior is the Exterior without the Boundary and the linguistic complement of the Exterior, the Interior without the Boundary. For instance, one of the ~te~re~tions of the utterance (11) will not be ‚She is middle-aged™ but ‚She is old™? (11) She isn™t young It must have been noticed that the same model is used for the representation of aspect. Here, the Interior, Exterior and Boundary are those defined by an interval on the linear space representing time. This space being unidimensional, the boundary splits into two parts (beginning and end of interval). The concept of adjacency is used for the part of the Exterior contiguous to a boundary (see above Fig. 2). The same representation through an interval is used for the notional representation of types ofprocesses or states, that is Aktionsart (or lexical aspect). Hence the distinc- tion between bounded (‚swallow™) and ‚boundable™ {‚walk™, ‚be ill™) processes and states and unbounded states (‚be stupid™). Some processes and temporary states will be unbounded notionally if their notional definition does not include a definition of the boundaries: such are ‚walk™ and ‚be ill™. Yet they will be ‚boundable™ as their boundaries (especially the second one) can be constructed by the enunciator in an utterance : (12) He walked to the door. 6h In French compl~men~a~re. 67 in French compkfmentaire linguistique. 68 This is another good example of Culioli™s appropriation of mathematical concepts in their applica- tion to the study of language. When they have proved useful but might distort what emerges from lin- guistic facts, they have to be adapted. The term complemenf is borrowed from mathematics because it is convenient in its meaning of ‚the other part of a whole™. Yet, for the speakers of a natural ianguage, this meaning undergoes a kind of placation, hence the concept of ‚linguistic complement™ which does not include the boundary. ‚Ibis emerges when people are asked to give the ‚opposite™ of a word. For young, they will give old (see also above note 16). M.-L. Groussier I Lingua 110 (2000) 157-182 179 3.5.2. The branching path69 model is mainly used to represent modal choice in cases when d, is not null, that is in second or fourth order modalities. Before choos- ing between validation and non-validation, the enunciator places himself in the pre- modal plane, where h is p/p™, that is, both Interior and Exterior together.70 From the pre-modal plane, the enunciator aims at either the Interior or the Exterior of the notional domain of h. This is represented as two paths branching from the same point which can be either open or barred or just not taken into account. Whenever there is projection of the validation or non-validation of h into the future, or for probability, one path is open and the other is closed. When there is no projection into the future, there are three cases. For positive possibility and capacity, the path to the Interior is taken into account and the other is not barred but just ignored. Negative possibility and capacity entail barring of the path to the Interior and reverting to a case very much like simple negative assertion. In the case of contingency and per- mission, both paths remain open (see Fig. 3). 4. In search of the essence of language At the time when young linguistics was fighting its way to scientific dignity, some scholars were so anxious not to be mistaken for old-style grammarians that they made a point of banishing meaning from the science of language. They were Amer- ican distributionalists and early transformationalists. Meanwhile, in Europe, the Prague school and Roman Jakobson, Gustave Guillaume and Emile Benveniste maintained, as, centuries before them, the Stoics had done, that the most obvious function of language being communication between human beings, the central prob- lem was the construction of meaning. Antoine Culioli is heir to those, along with John Anderson, Dwight Bolinger, Charles Fillmore, Joseph Firbas, Michael Halli- day, Ray Jackendoff, Andre Joly, Susumu Kuno, Geoffrey Leech, John Lyons, and Bernard Pottier, and, a little later, Bernard Connie, Simon C. Dik, R.M.W. Dixon, David Dowty, Talmy Givdn and Ronald Langacker, among others. I hope the above very sketchy outline of the main points in Antoine Culioli™s The- ory of Enunciative Operations will have, at least, shown Culioli™s specificities in his search for the essence of language, that is, for invariants, through the study of nat- ural languages. Though he was aware very early of the shortcomings of distribution- alism, he has never ceased to advocate the scrupulous and extensive study of forms in corpora as the only way of becoming properly acquainted with linguistic phe- nomena. Yet, he has always claimed, too, that the study of morphosyntactic forms is no end in itself. It should be regarded only as the necessary basis for the construc- tion of interpretation in terms of meaning and reference. However, interpretation being apt to run out of hand, it should be controlled by formalization, a coherent sys- tem of ‚Level 3™ representations of operations allowing calculation. h9 In French: bifurcation. ‚O Culioli also represents this pre-modal state of h by IE meaning ‚I and E together™ 180 M.-L. Groussier I Lingua II0 (2000) 157-182 1. Positive volition Positive deontic mod. 2. Capacity Positive possibility 3. Negative volition Negative deontic mod. Impossibility 4. Contingency Fig. 3. The branching path representation of modality. Finally, the main idiosyncrasy of Culioli™s method is probably his repeated asser- tion of the irreductible specificity of linguistics as a science. Although he finds it necessary to take into account cognitive psychology in the interpretation of linguis- tic facts, he is very careful not to confuse the two fields. In the same way, though he thinks some of the working principles of mathematics, logic and topology can be used to give coherence and rigour to the representation of linguistic operations, he is also convinced of the necessity of resorting to mathematics only in so far as linguis- tic data do not belie calculation. If the tool proves too powerful, it must be discarded or adapted. M.-L. Groussier I Lingua I IO (2Of10) 157-182 181 It is the preservation of this precarious but indispensable boundary between lin- guistics and related sciences which makes the linguist™s task according to Culioli most difficult. References By Antoine Culioli (a had selection of his n,ritin~~ even when not quofed in the paper) 1968a. A propos du genre en anglais contemporain. Les Langues Modemes 3, 326-334. 1968b. La formalisation en linguistique. Cahiers pour I™Analyse 9, 106117. 1970. with Catherine Fuchs and Michel P&cheux. Considerations theoriques a ptopos du traitement formel du langage. Paris: Dunod. 1971. A propos d™operations intervenant dam le traitement formel des langues naturelles. Mathema- tiques et Sciences Humaines 34, 7-l 5. 1973. Sur quelques contradictions en linguistique. Communications 20, 83-91. 1974. A propos des &on& exclamatifs. Langue Fran9aise 22, 6-1.5. 1975. Notes sur determination et quantification: Definition des operations d™extraction et de flkhage. Programme Interdisciplinaire de Traitement Formel et Automatique de Langues et du Langage (PIT- FALL), Working Paper, mimeographed, Departement de Recherches Linguistiques, Universite Paris 7. I976a. Comment tenter de construire un modele logique adequat a la description des langues naturelles. In: J. David and R. Martin (eds.), Modeles logiques et niveau d™analyse linguistique, 35-47. Paris: Klincksieck. 1976b. Recherche en linguistique: Theorie des Operations Enonciatives, transc~ption par les Ctudiants du seminaire de DEA 1975-1976. Paris: ~pa~ement de Recherches Linguistiques. University Paris l97k.a. Valeurs modales et operations Cnonciatives. Le Frdncais Modeme 46(4), 300-3 17. 1978b. Valeurs aspectuelles et operations Cnonciatives: L™aoristique. In: J. David and R. Martin (eds.), La notion d™aspect. Actes du colloque organise par le Centre d™Analyse Syntaxique de I™UniversitC de Metz (18-20 mai 1978) 181-193, Paris: Klincksieck. 1978c. Linguistique du discours et discours sur la linguistique. Revue Philosophique 4, 48 l-488. 1979. Conditions d™utilisation des don&s issues de plusieurs langues naturelles. ModEIes Linguistiques I, I ( 89-103. 1980. Rapport sur un rapport. In: Andre Joly ted.), La Psychom~canique et les theories de l™~nonciation. Actes de la Table Ronde tenue a Lille Ies I6 et 17 mars 1979, 3747. Lille: Presses Universitaires de Lille. 1981. Sur le concept de notion. Bulletin de Linguistique AppliquCe et Generate 8, Besancon. 62-79. 1982. Role des representations m&alinguistiques en syntaxe: Communication present&e a la session pleniere du XIII& Congres International des Linguistes, Tokyo, 29 aout- septembre 1982. In: ERA 642. Paris: Departement de Recherches Linguistiques. Universite Paris 7. 1983a. The concept of notional domain. In: Les universaux en linguistique. Actes du colloque intema- tional de Gummersbach (3-8 octobre 1976). Tiibingen: Nan-. 1983b. A propos de quelque. In: Sophie Fisher and J.J. Franckel (eds.). L~~istique et ~nonciation. Aspects et detestation, 21-29. Paris: EHESS. 1984. Theories du Iangage et theories des langues. In: Benveniste aujourd™hui. Actes du colloque CNRS de Tours, 1983, vol. I, 77-85. Paris: SocietC pour l™lnformation Grammaticale. 1985. Seminaire de DEA 1983-1984, notes prises par des Etudiants. Offset-printed. Poitiers: Universite Paris 7 and UniversitQ de Poitiers. 1986a. La Frontiere. Lignes de Partage, Cahiers Charles V, 8, Institut d™anglais Charles V, Universite Paris 7. 1986b. Stabilitr? et dhformabilite en linguistique. Etudes de Lettres, Special issue of Langages et Con- naissances, 3-10, Lausanne: Universite de Lausanne. 182 M.-L. Groussier I Lingua 1 IO (2000) 157482 1987a. Formes schematiques et domaine. Bulletin de Lmguistique Appliqute et G&&ale 13, 7-15. Besancon: Universitt! de Besancon. 1987b. La linguistique, de l™empirique au formel. In: Sens et place des connaissances dam la societe: 33 confrontation: 37-67, Paris: CNRS. 1988a. Autres commentaires sur bien. In: Blanche-Benveniste, C., A. Chervel and M. Gross (eds.), Melanges Stdfanini: Grammaire et histoim de la grammaire. Hommage a la memoire de Jean St& fanini, 169-180. Aix-en-Provence: Universitit de Provence. 1988b. La negation: Marqueurs et op&ations. In: La negation sous divers aspects. Actes du colloque de Neuchatel, 22-23 octobre 1987, 17-38. (Travaux du Centre de Recherches Semiologiques, 56.) Neuchatel: Universite de Neuchatel. 1989a. Representation, referential processes and regulation. Language activity as form production and recognition. In: J. Montangero and A. Tryphon, (eds.), Language and cognition (Jean Piaget founda- tion archives, lo), 97-124. Geneva: Jean Piaget Foundation. 1989b. DOE. Supostavitelno Ezikoznanie / Contrastive Linguistics 14(5), 1620. (Sofia, Bulgaria) 1990. Pour une linguistique de l™enonciation. Operations et representations, vol. 1, Paris: Ophrys. (A reprint of articles 1978a, 1981. 1983a, 1986a,b, 1987a,b, 1988a,b, 1989a,b above.) 1995a. Cognition and ~p~sen~tion in linguistic theory: Texts (mainly 1985 above) selected, edited and introduced by Michel Liddle, translated with the assistance of John T. Stoneham. {Current Issues in Linguistic Theory, 112.) Amsterdam: Benjamins. 1995b. En guise de clBture. In: S. Robert (ed.), Langage et sciences humaines: Propos croises. Actes du Colloque ‚Langues et Langage™ en hommage a Antoine Culioli (Ecole Normale Sup&ieure Paris, 11 decembre 1992), 145-160. (Sciences pour la communication, 46.) Bern: Lang. 1995~. Even though, even if: As though, as if. In: C. Charreyre (ed.), Linguistique et didactique. KalCi- doscope pour Wendy Halff, Cahiers Charles V 19, 85-92. Paris: Universite Paris 7. 1997a. A propos de la notion. In: C. Rivitre and M.L. Groussier (eds.), La notion. Actes du colloque tenu a l™liniversid Paris 7 en f&ier 19969-26. Paris: Ophrys. 1997b. Subjectivite, invariance et deploiement des formes dam la construction des representations lin- guistiques. In: C. Fuchs and S. Robert (eds.), Diversite des langues et representations cognitives, 43-57. Paris: Ophrys. 1999. Des facons de qualifier. In: A. Deschamps and J. Guillemin-FIescher (eds.), Les operations de determination: Quantification et qualification, Paris: Ophrys. By other authors (quoted in this paper) Benveniste, Emile, 1958. De la subjectivite dam le langage. Journal de Psychologie, Juillet-Septembre 1958. Reprinted in Benveniste 1966: 258-266. Benveniste, Emile, 1960. Etre et avoir dam leurs fonctions linguistiques. Bulletin de la Societe de Lin- guistique LV. Reprinted in Benveniste 1966: 187-207. Benveniste, Emile, 1966. Problemes de linguistique gCnCrale. Paris: Gallimard. Bouscaren, Janine, J. Chuquet and L. Danon-Boileau, 1987. Grammaire et textes anglais. Guide pour l™analyse linguistique. Paris: Ophrys. Bouscaren, Janine, J. Chuquet and L. Danon-Boileau, 1992. Introduction to a linguistic grammar of Eng- lish. An utterer-centred approach. Translated and adapted by Ronald Flintham and J. Bouscaren. Paris: ophrys. Grize, Jean-Blaise, 1967. Logique. In: J. Piaget (ed.), Logique et connaissance scientifique, Ency- clop&iie de la Pleiade, 135-288. Paris: Gallimard. Milner, Jean-Claude, 1992, De quelques aspects de la theorie d™Antoine Culioli projet& dam un espace non Cnonciatif. In: La theorie d™Antoine Culioli: Ouvertures et incidences, Actes de la table ronde ‚Operations de rep&age et domaines notionnels™ organiste par le groupe ‚Invariants langagiers™ de I™URA 1028 (Mai-Juin 1991). Paris: Ophrys. Piaget, Jean (ed.), 1967. Logique et connaissance scientifique. Encyclopedic de la Pleiade. Paris: Galli- mard. Van Valin, Robert Jr. and Randy J. LaPolla, 1997. Syntax: Structure, meaning and function. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 