ELSEVIER Lingua 110(2000)183-213 Ellipsis and discourse-linking* Luis L6pez* Department of Spanish, French, Italian and Portuguese (MC 315), College of Liheral Arts and Sciences, University of Illinois, 601 South Morgan St.. Chicago. IL 60607. USA Received 8 March 1999; revised version 24 June 1999 Abstract This paper provides an account of the distribution of the forms of ellipsis called Sluicing, NP-ellipsis and VP-ellipsis. It argues that (if ellipsis is a pro-form, (ii) the pro-form is within an Hﬂﬁﬁ, H a functionaI head, by LF, (iii) this functional head has the property of being Dis- course-Linking, which licenses the empty category in the syntax. Most of the data base is taken from English, but the analyses include VP-ellipsis phenomena in Italian and NP-ellip- sis in Spanish which have not been discussed within the generative tradition until now. 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Ellipsis; Sluicing; NP-Ellipsis; D-Linking; Licensing; Functional categories 1. Introduction Williams™ (1977) classic paper on VP-ellipsis (VPE) argues for splitting grammar into two separate sub-systems, called Discourse Grad (DG) and Sentence Gram- mar (SG). In SG we would find operations that involve constituents within the same sentence and which are constrained by Ross™ (1967) islands; DC rules cross sen- tence boundaries and would not be constrained by Ross™ islands, which are defined * I thank the following people who were kind enough to read drafts of this paper and give me com- ments that led to important improvements: Rajesh Bhatt, Richard Kayne, Anne Lobeck, Tom Stroik, Margarita Sutier, Xavier Villalba, Susanne Winkler, Sandro Zucchi. Early versions were presented at the University of Iowa, Michigan State University and GLOW 20. 1 thank the audiences for their questions and comments, specially Alan Munn and Christina Schmitt. Finally, the anonymous reviewers deserve credit for their help in clarifying several issues and reorganizing this paper. The mistakes that remain are all mine. The research reported in this paper was partially funded by a University of Missouri summer support fellowship. * Phone: +1 312 996 3235; Fax: +1 312 413 1044. 037%2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(99)00036-4 184 L. Lbpez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 as restrictions on SG rules. The rules of SG would give rise to Logical Form (LF) representations which would feed the rules of DG. Thus, LF is regarded as an inter- face representation between SG and DG. This SG/DG separation was motivated by contrasts between Gapping and Comparative Deletion on the one hand, and VPE on the other, which suggested that Gapping and Comparative Deletion are phenomena that could be described within SG whereas an analysis of VPE interpretation needed the wider domain of DG.™ It is especially interesting that the SG and DG components would not be water- tight in Williams™ model. f-subscripting, an SG rule, would mark elided categories at D-Structure as being free from SG interpretation rules and consequently would put them directly in the realm of DG. Thus, f-subscripting, relevant to both SG and DG, would connect the two sub-systems. Later work on ellipsis treats SG and DG as fully autonomous. Asher (1993), Hardt (1993), Klein (1987) and Prtist et al. (1993) offer analyses of VPE interpreta- tion without any reference to syntax. On the other hand, a tradition that begins with Zagona (1982) explores the syntactic aspects of VPE within the Principles and Para- meters framework, particularly trying to define the functional category that licenses it, without mentioning discourse. Thus, the implicit assumption among those work- ing on ellipsis seems to be that syntactic and semantic/discourse concerns are inde- pendent issues. In this paper, I propose to re-investigate Williams™ original intuition that an understanding of the syntax of ellipsis involves DG. In particular, I argue that ellip- sis is syntactically licensed by a functional category that has the property of con- necting with a discourse topic. Further, I show that elliptical categories are pro-forms that adjoin to the licensing functional head and I hypothesise that this adjunction is necessary for the elided category to retrieve an antecedent. Thus, I locate the study of the syntax of ellipsis in the interface between SG and DG, just as Williams did in his original paper. Let me now introduce the data base that I set out to account for. Consider the examples in (l), (2) and (3). (1) is called Sluicing, or IP-ellipsis. (2a) exemplifies NP-ellipsis (NPE traditionally called N™ deletion); (2b) exemplifies partial NPE, which has been argued by Nerbonne et al. (1989, 1990) to be a sub-species of NPE. (3a) represents VP-ellipsis (VPE) and (3b) Pseudogapping (Levin, 1979); Pseudo- gapping has also been classified by Jayaseelan (1990) and Lasnik (1995) as a VPE construction:2 ™ For instance, the rule of VPE interpretation does not respect the Complex Noun Phrase Constraint whereas Gapping does (these are my examples, Williams does not provide examples of Gapping): (i) The place where Chris plays tennis is close to the place where Pat does [e]. (ii) *The place where Chris plays tennis is close to the place where Pat [e] squash. As a matter of fact, restrictions on Gapping are even stricter, since it can™t be found in any subordinate clause (see Lobeck, 1995 and references therein). ™ Jayaseelan and Lasnik™s approaches, however, differ markedly from mine. They both argue that VP- ellipsis and Pseudogapping are the outcome of a PF-deletion operation. I do not agree with their PF-dele- tion analysis (see section 7) but retain the intuition that they are basically the same phenomenon. L. Ldpez i L&U 110 (2000~183-213 185 (1) I know Pat wants to buy something but I don™t know Icp what [ire] ]. (2) a. Some men like soccer but &most INp e]] do not . b. I saw several [e] from New York. (3) a. Chris has not read War and Peace, but Pat [tphas [vpe]]. b. I cleaned the bathroom before Mike did [e] the kitchen. Lobeck (1995) has shown that (l), (2a) and (3a), to which we should add (Zb) and (3b), form a natural class of elements distinct from other types of implicit strings, such as Gapping, Bare Argument Ellipsis and others.? Therefore, it is methodologi- cally sound to seek a unified analysis of their syntax and put aside Gapping and the rest.4 Any unified analysis of elided categories must account for the restrictiveness of their distribution. Witness, for example, the ungrammaticality of (4): (4) *I know Pat wants to buy something but I don™t know what the hell [e]. In (4), we see that not every wh-word can license Sluicing. Relatedly, although the majority of determiners can license NPE, as in (2) a few determiners such as ‚every™ do not (first noticed by Lobeck, 1995: 93). This is illustrated in (S): (5) *Some men like football but every ]e] does not. VPE is also a restricted phenomenon. As (3) above demons~dtes, auxiliaries allow for an empty category on their right edge; however, if the auxiliary is reduced or contracted, the result is ungrammatical (King, 1970): 3 See Lobeck (1995: 21) for a detailed account. 4 Chung et al. (1995) suggest that Sluicing and VPE are different phenomena. According to them, Sluicing is generated as an empty category, interpreted by means of recycling whereas VPE is the result of PF deletion. They base this claim on Ross™ (1969) demonstration that wh-movement out of a Sluiced site does not obey the island constraints and their own observation that wh-movement out of a VPE site does (Haik 1987 makes the same point in the context of Antecedent Contained Deletion). (i) is an exam- ple of Sluicing, (ii) of VPE (taken from Chung et al., 1995: 274-275) both instantiating extraction from an adjunct : (i) Sandy is very anxious to see if the students will be able to solve the homework problem in a par- ticular way, but she won™t tell us in which way (Sandy is very anxious to see if the students will be able to solve the homework problem in a particular way) [cf: *In which way is Sandy very anxious to see if the students will be able to solve the homework problem t ?] (ii) *What did you leave before they did [cf: *What did you leave before they started playing t ? J However, notice that the wh-word ‚in which way™ in (i) is not linked to a trace in an ordinary movement chain. Instead, it is linked with the indefinite PP ‚in a particular way™ which, appar- ently, can act as a variable at LF for the wh-word. If the wh-word is connected with a trace, island effects show up, as Chung et al. remark: (iii) *Sandy is very anxious to see which students will be able to solve the homework problem, but she won™t say how. Thus, observance of wh-islands per se does not differentiate VPE from Sluicing, suggesting that both have an internal structure at LF. Examples like (i) are certainly interesting, but I do not think they can be taken as basis to claim that VPE and Sluicing arise as the output of different syntactic operations. 186 L. Ldpez / Lingua II0 (2000) 183-213 (6) *Chris has not read War and Peace, but Pat™s. Furthermore, Italian VP-ellipsis, exemplified in (7a), is also restricted in an interest- ing way. The negative word IZO that stands next to the ellipsis site is the word used to answer questions or for short answers, as in (7b). Interestingly, plain sentential negation cannot license ellipsis, as shown in (7~): (7) a. Carlo & venuto ma Pietro no [e]. ‚Carlo has come but Pietro (has) not™ b. -Carlo e venuto? ‚Has Carlo come?™ -No, credo di no. ‚No, I think not™ c. *Carlo e venuto ma Pietro non [e]. ‚Carlo has come but Pietro (has) not™ [cf: &rlo e venuto ma Pietro non b venuto] In order to account for this array of contrasts, I borrow Pesetsky™s notion of D(iscourse)-linking and adapt it for my purposes. Pesetsky™s (1987) notion of D- linking referred to the ability of most wh-words to pick an entity or set of entities from a set of alternatives that is present in the minds of both speaker and hearer - for instance, Chris can say to Pat ‚which one do you like?‚, only if both Chris and Pat know what set of elements Pat is expected to choose from; D-linking questions are opposed to out-of-the-blue questions, which are not uttered on the basis of shared knowledge - for instance, I can pick up the phone saying ‚what can I do for you? ™ without presupposing a set of things that I can do for my interlocutor. So, under Pesetsky™s proposal, the reference of a D-linking wh-word can be found either in the context or in the previous discourse.5 Let me introduce two changes to Pesetsky™s notion. The first is that D-linking be considered a feature of a functional category. So, if a sentence includes a D-linking wh-word, there must be a matching D-linking feature in the C(omplemetizer) (evi- dence for this feature in C is in section 2). This feature is an instruction for the inter- pretive component that says ‚connect with a discourse topic™. If D-linking is a fea- ture of a functional category, it should not be surprising that other functional categories can also be D-linking - in particular, I will show that D and C (Laka, 1990) can also be D-linking. My second change is that I need to ‚narrow down™ Pesetsky™s notion so that only connection with the previous discourse, and not merely with a context, is relevant for ellipsis licensing (although the distinction is empirically relevant only in my discus- sion of NPE). I call this ‚narrow™ D-linking. In this paper, I propose that C, D and C are functional categories that may have the optional feature ‚narrow™ D-linking and when that is the case they may license an empty category. This corresponds to Prince™s (1992) distinction between ‚hearer-old™ information (presupposed but unmentioned information) and ‚discourse-old™ information (explicitly mentioned in the discourse). L. Ldpez I Lingua 1 IO (ZOOO] f83-213 187 Thus, I propose hypothesis (8): (8) Elided constituents are licensed when they are associated with a discourse-link- ing functional category. An elided constituent is interpreted by retrieving relevant information from a fin- guistic antecedent.6 Therefore, we can understand elided consti~ents as semantic variables with an index that must be formally linked to something else in the dis- course. What (8) proposes is that this linking of an elided category and an antecedent is mediated by a D-linking functional category which acts as a hook between anaphor and antecedent. In (S), I use the word ‚associated™ in a purposefully vague manner. In the second half of this paper I argue that (i) the elided category is a pro-form and (ii) it is adjoined to the functional head that licenses it. The final hypothesis reads: (8™) Elided constituents are licensed iff included in Hmax, HIDlink,ngl. The paper is organized as follows. In sections 2-4, I show that the different forms of ellipsis can only be found when a D-linking word is in the immediate vicinity of the empty category. In section 5, I argue that elided constituents are pro-forms. In section 6, I argue that an elided category is adjoined to the licensing head: I present empirical evidence that elided constituents move head-to-head and that this move- ment respects the Backwards Anaphora Constraint and the Coordinate Structure Constraint. In section 7, I contrast my approach to previous analyses. The final sec- tion discusses some consequences and conclusions. 2. Sluicing™ The purpose of this section is to show that hypothesis (g), repeated here, holds for Sluicing in example (l), also repeated: (1) I know Pat wants to buy something but I don™t know lcp what [tp el 1. ™ Some scholars, most particularly Chao (1988: 86-92), have argued that VPE can have a non-linguis- tic antecedent. tobeck (1995: 26) additionally presents some examples of pragmatically controtled NPE and Sluicing. I align myself with Hankamer f 1978) who argues that every anaphoric expression can have a contextual antecedent if the context is stereotyped. For instance one can say ‚you shouidn™t have™ when receiving a present but not when your roommate just ate your last cookie. The question is whether this deictic ability is fully productive or not, and the answer is no. Compare (i) and (ii): it is clear that ‚he™ does not need to refer back to ‚Pat™ but that the elided VP does need to refer back to the antecedent pred- icate: (i) Pat runs fast and he jumps high. (ii) Pat runs fast and Chris does [e] too. 7 See Ross (1969), Chung et al. (1995), Lobeck (1995); Ginzburg (1992); Ramos-Santacruz (1996) for analyses of Sluicing. 188 L. L6pez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 (8) Elided constituents are licensed when they are associated with a discourse-link- ing functional category. Pesetsky (1987) proposed the concept of D-linking to discuss some properties of wh-words in situ. He distinguishes between wh-words that are more naturally D- linking, for instance ‚which™, and wh-words that usually introduce out-of-the-blue questions, like ‚what™. However, as he acknowledges, ‚what™ can also be D-linking. The only wh-word that he proposes that can never be D-linking in English is ‚what the hell™. We can see the contrast between ‚what™ and ‚what the hell™ with the help of example (9). (9a) shows that ‚what™ can be ‚narrow™ D-linking, since it links with a pre-established set. In (9b), the # sign indicates that this utterance is inappropriate in the present context. This inappropriateness comes about because ‚what the hell™ cannot be used to refer to a previously mentioned set of things: (9) a. You see, I could buy a new computer, a new car or a trip to Hawai. Guess what I am going to get. b. #You see, I could buy a new computer, a new car or a trip to Hawai. Guess what the hell I am going to get. As predicted by my hypothesis (8) ‚what the hell™ cannot license sluicing: (10) I know Pat wanted to buy something but I don™t know . . . :: ::: what she wanted to buy. what the hell she wanted to buy. :: ::: what [e]. *what the hell. As discussed in the introductory section, I assume that the lexicon includes a ‚D- linking™ feature which is an instruction in a functional category - in this case C - that says ‚connect with a discourse topic™. This instruction is an optional feature of C and it is meant to be read by LF as it maps to DG. When C bears this instruction, an empty IP can be licensed. On the other hand, ‚what the hell™, is incompatible with this ‚D-linking™ feature. Thus, ‚what the hell™ and Sluicing cannot co-occur because they impose contradictory requirements on C. Do we have evidence that C may have this extra feature? Let me adapt an argu- ment from Stroik (1999). Consider the sentences in (11) and (12): (11) a. Who knows what? b. *Who knows what the hell? (12) Who knows what Mary read to whom? As is well known, wh-words in situ must be D-linking, as shown in (1 lb). This entails that ‚to whom™ in (12) must be D-linking. As Pesetsky (1987) points out, (12) is ambiguous because the in situ wh-word can be paired with the one in the matrix clause or the one in the subordinate clause. So, possible answers to (12) are ‚Lou knows what Mary read to Pat™ or ‚I know Mary read War and Peace to Pat™. Peset- sky analyzed this example in terms of coindexation, so the in situ wh-word can be coindexed with the highest wh-word or with the intermediate one. Recent work by Chomsky (1993, 1995) has shown persuasively that coindexation is a descriptive device rather than an explanatory one. I suggest therefore to recast Pesetsky™s intu- ition in terms of ‚Attract™: the in situ wh-word can be attracted by the higher C or by the subordinate C!. However, if what attracts the in situ wh-word is only a [wh] fea- ture, then the in situ wh-word cannot be attracted by the C in the matrix clause. because it would violate ‚Shortest Move™ (Chomsky, 1993). Instead, assume that C can have an additional [D-linking] feature. No violation of shortest move arises if what attracts the in situ wh-word at LF is a [D-linking] feature in the matrix C. The idea that a sluiced clause takes its meaning from an antecedent has always been clear. For instance, Ginzburg (1992: 301-302) offers example (I 3): ( 13) John likes some students, but I don™t know who. #I don™t know who John likes. =I don™t know who the students that John likes are. As he explains, this sentence can have the second meaning much more naturally than the first one, that is, the meaning of the sluice is taken from the previous discourse. What I add to this knowledge is that this linguistic recycling is not free but is licensed by a D-linking C. It can be said that the D-linking C is a necessary media- tor between antecedent and anaphor. 3, NP-ellipsis 3.1. English8 As shown in (14), NPs can be elided leaving overt a demonstrative (14a), a quan- tifier (14b,c) , or a genitive NP (14d): ( 14) Some novels are decent . . . a. . . . but these [e] are not. b. . but most [e] are not. c. _. but many [e] are not. d. . . . but Sam™s ]e] are not. For simplicity, I will assume that demonstratives, quantifiers and the genitive marker ﬁs™ are all determiners (Abney, 19X7).ﬂ In the following, I show that the functional ™ See Jackendoff (1977): Lobeck (1995) Nerbonne et al. ( 1989, I990). Slecman ( 19%) for an:~lyw~. ﬂ Several investigations into the syntax of DPs have yielded a more comp1e.x internal structure than the one I am assuming. In particular, it has been argued that demonstrativea occupy the spec positron 01 it functional category immediately dominated by DP (see Rota, 1996 for a survey and rcfcrcnccs). A\ (‚in as 1 can tell. and provided that specs and heads share all relevant features. this finding dots not afl™~ct mg main points. 190 L. Lc5pez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 category D can be D-linking - can have a feature that instructs it to look for a dis- course topic - and that only in this case is NPE licensed. Demonstratives are uncontroversially D-linking, since they can easily refer back to a dicsourse topic, so nothing else needs to be said about them. As for quantifiers, it has been claimed (En9, 1991, among others) that all quanti- fiers are inherently specific because the range of a quantified NP must be restricted by context. For instance, ‚every student arrived late™ does not mean that every stu- dent on earth arrived late; ‚every student™ refers to a set of students that is relevant for the interlocutors in the speech act. Von Fintel(1994) and others have argued that these restrictions on quantifier domain should be integrated into the representation of quantifiers as a hidden domain argument whose interpretation is contextually sup- plied. Consequently, the LF of the DP ‚most™ is as in (15), where C represents con- text: (15) [I mostc IIs (A,B) iff [I most I] (g(C)nA,B) (Von Fintel, 1994: 30) (15) means that in order to obtain the value of a quantifier the value of the context intersects with the first argument of that quantifier - the NP. Thus, the variable C ensures that quantifiers are D-linking, in a sort of broad sense, because their com- plements must be in a set that is present in the minds of speaker and hearer . If this were all that is required to license NPE, we would expect all quantifiers to license NPE. However, this is not the case: (16) Some men are decent . . . :: ::: but most [e] are not. but many [e] are not. zl: ::: but all [e] are not. but some [e] are not. ;: ::: but three [e] are not. but each [e] is not. !: ::: *but every [e] is not. *but no [e] is perfect. ‚Every™ and ‚no™ do not allow for partial NPE either: (17) a. We saw many [e] that qualified. b. *We saw every/no [e] that qualified. So, why are (16g,h) and (17b) ungrammatical? It is now when the ‚narrow™ defini- tion of D-linking comes into play. I argue that ‚every™ and ‚no™ are not ‚narrow™ D- linking and that is the reason why they do not license NPE. We can detect if a quan- tifier is ‚narrow™ D-linking in partitives. Compare (18a) with (18b): L. Lbpeez i Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 191 (18) a. [Some men]i came in. [Most of the menfi sat down. b. [Some men& came in. [Most men]% sat down. When the complement of a quantifier refers to something that is discourse-old, what we find is a partitive PP instead of a NP. NPE needs an antecedent that is discourse- old as well: (19) [Some men& came in. [Most pro]i,*j sat down. If my claim that ‚no™ and ‚every™ are not ‚narrow™ D-linking quantifiers is correct, I predict that we should not find ‚every™ and ‚no™ with partitives (Lobeck, 1995: 93). We can see this in (20): (20) Some men are decent . . . : ::: but most of them are not. but many of them are not. :: ::: but all of them are not. but some of them are not. ;: ::: but three of them are not. but each of them is not. g. *.. *but every of them is not. h. . . . *but no of them is perfect. How should partitives be analyzed? A first line could be to assume that partitive DPs actually involve an empty category pro, as represented in (21): (21) Several [e] of the students . . . If so, the ~gr~matic~ity of (16g,h) and (20g,h) could be accounted for simply by stipulating that ‚every™ and ‚no™ do not select for an empty category. In fact, Jack- endoff (1977: 106-I 18) argues that partitives are a subcase of what I call NP-ellip- sis. For him, this empty category - which he assumes to be a pronominal category - is interpreted as UNIT. However, this solution is suspect for several reasons: (i) Notice that other instances of pro either refer to something or other or they are expletives, but they do not refer to an abstract entity like UNIT. (ii) We cannot find an overt counterpart for [e] in (21) ( ‚several (ones/units) of the students™?), but we can always find overt counterparts for other elided pro-forms (‚several (pictures) made in Canada™). (iii) We find partitive cons~ctions with mass nouns, as in ‚most of the flour™, and in this case the putative [e] does not mean UNIT - as a matter of fact it is not clear what [e] would mean at all. For these reasons, I propose that there is no empty category in partitive constructions, and instead, I suggest that in these cases the quantifier selects for a PP headed by ‚of™. To conclude, only those quantifiers that can be ‚narrow™ D-linking can have par- titives or elided nouns as complements. This confirms hypothesis (8): an elided con- stituent is licensed by a D-linking functional category. 192 L. Lbpez I Lingua 1 IO (2000) 183-213 A couple of problems remain to be explained. First, possessors like ‚my™, ‚your™ etc, can certainly be ‚narrow™ D-linking but cannot license ellipsis: (22) -What do you think of Peter and Mary™s novels. -His novels are not good, but her novels are. (23) -What do you think of Peter and Mary™s novels? -*His novels are not good, but her are. [Cf: . . . but hers are] Likewise, ‚the™ is certainly D-linking, but it cannot license NP-ellipsis. A possible account for these cases can use Williams™ (1997) notion of ‚Blocking™, which he argues is an overarching property of grammars, relevant for syntax as well as mor- phology or spanning between the two. In his terms, the crucial notion for blocking is specificity: when two forms compete, the more specific one beats the more general one. This is why in English we have the word ‚glory™ instead of ‚*gloriosity™, derived from ‚glorious™ by means of a general rule of nominalization. Turning now to (23), the DPs *[her, my, your [e]] are ungrammatical because the English lexicon includes the more specific forms ‚hers™, ‚mine™, ‚yours™ which are specified in the lexicon as obligatorily selecting for a null complement. The assump- tion that the latter forms select for an empty category might be controversial - why could they not be intransitive determiners. qio However, it provides an account for an otherwise mysterious contrast: (24) a. His cousins from New York are nicer than mine [e] from Minnesota. b. *His blonde cousins are nicer than mine brunette [e]. ‚Mine™ can be modified by a PP but not by an adjective. Assume that these sentences have an empty category in the position indicated. If so, this empty category is in the immediate vicinity of the relevant D-linking category in (24a) but not in (24b). The ungrammaticality of (24b) reduces to a classic intervention effect (which will be ana- lyzed in terms of movement of [e] to D in section 6). We can now turn to (14d), repeated here: (14) Some novels are decent . . . d . . . . but Sam™s [e] are not. Notice that we can have a full NP in the place of [e]. This is the expected result, since the genitive DP form is not competing with anything else. Turning now to the definite determiner ‚the™, I propose that (25a) is blocked by (25b) : lo When discussing partitives, I argued that the absence of an overt counterpart suggested that the exis- tence of a silent category was dubious. There is no contradiction here. The determiner ‚several™ can select for overt or silent complements, but when it is found in a partitive construction, it can only select for an empty category under Jackendoff™s approach, which is what I find suspicious. This is different from hav- ing a determiner like ‚hers™ or ‚mine™, specified in the lexicon as selecting only an empty category. L. Lbpez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 193 (25) a. *A man came in. The [e] sat down. b. A man came in. He sat down. One way of interpreting Williams™ notion of specificity in Blocking can be in terms of features: the form with the richer feature structure is more specific and will block the form with the poorer feature structure. ‚The™ is a determiner with features [defi- nite] and [singular]. ‚He™ is also a determiner, with features [definite], [singular] and [masculine]. As a consequence, the more specific determiner blocks the more gen- eral determiner. ™ ™ 3.2. Spanish™2 The main conclusions of section 3.1 are corroborated in Spanish, where we see again that a quantifier that selects for an empty NP also selects for a partitive PP. In Spanish, masculine indefinite quantifiers appear in two guises. In one guise, they exhibit a suffix -0 ,with gender information, an instance of what Harris (1991) calls Word Marker. This type of indefinite selects for a partitive PP. In the other guise, masculine indefinite quantifiers do not have a word marker and they select for a NP. This can be seen in examples (26). The indefinite al&z, meaning ‚some™ takes a NP as complement, whereas alguno, with the same meaning, takes a partitive phrase : (26) a. Yo he visto algiin decano hoy. *algun ‚I have seen some dean today™ b. Yo he visto alguno de 10s decanos hoy. *algtin ‚I have seen some of the deans today™ In view of (26), I assume that this suffix -0 is a marker of specificity (so it is differ- ent from ordinary word markers, which typically do not carry this type of informa- tion).13 Only the alguno form can license NPE: ﬂ Lobeck (1995) notices that partitive determiners license ellipsis, which she accounts by means of a morpho-syntactic [+partitive] feature that triggers strong agreement between D and Spec,D. For her, this is just one of the possible features that license NP-ellipsis, the others being [+possessor] and [+plural]. Possessors are analyzed in the main body of this paper. However, I do not at this point have an expla- nation for the ungrammaticality of(i), which Lobeck accounts for by saying that ‚this™ does not have any of the relevant features: (i) *Some novels are decent, but this [e] is not. Sleeman (1996) discusses NP-ellipsis in French in depth and shows how the partitive feature accounts for the data in this language. Her conceptual basis, based on specificity and the idea that elided NPs are subsets of previously mentioned NPs is very close to mine (see section 7). ‚* See Contmras (1989) for an analysis of Spanish empty nouns. I3 Bernstein (1993) proposes that word markers are syntactic heads that may adjoin to the quantifier or to the noun. She claims that we cannot have *algano +cano (some dean) because a word marker is a single syntactic head. However, this analysis fails to provide a satisfactory account of abuna decana, a DP with two feminine word markers. 194 L. Lbpez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 (27) Yo he visto alguno/*alghn hoy. ‚I have seen some today™ The same is true of the other indefinite determiners: unluno, meaning ‚one™ and ningunlninguno, which means ‚any™ in negative contexts. Notice that they can also select for partial NPE: (28) a. No encontre a ninguno [e] que conociera a Juan. Not I-met any that s/he-met Jtlatl ‚I did not meet any(one) that knew Juan™ b. Estuve buscando zapatos y por fin me compre unos [e] hechos en China. I-was looking for shoes and by end for-me I-bought some made in China ‚I looked for some shoes and finally I bought some made in china™ 4. VP-ellipsis In section 4, I discuss ellipsis of predicates in Italian and English. First, I show that in Italian there is a VP-ellipsis construction with the same properties as English VPE. Then I argue that Italian VPE is licensed by a D-linking functional category. Finally, I claim that English VPE is consistent with hypothesis (8). 4.1. VP-ellipsis in Italian VP-ellipsis in Italian is (29): l4 licensed by a negative/affirmative word as we can see in (29) a. Carlo e venuto ma Pietro no. ‚Carlo has come but Pietro (has) not™ b. Carlo non e venuto ma Pietro si. ‚Carlo not has come but Pietro yes/has™ Following Laka (1990), I assume that there is a syntactic head called C that encom- passes negation and affirmation. In Italian, si would be the head of affirmative C and no or non would be the heads of negative C. I further assume that C is merged as part of the extended projection of a predicate and that the head of this predicate raises through the extended projection for feature checking. Although I am aware that a variety of analyses for the syntax of negation have been proposed in the last few years, these assumptions are relatively standard. ﬂ Spanish, Portuguese and Basque allow for VPE in the Italian way. Quechua allows for ellipsis licensed by a negative word but it does not have any sort of affirmative word. I don™t have data on other languages, but it seems that ellipsis licensed by an affirmative/negative word may well be a wide-spread phenomenon. L. Lbpez i Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 195 (30) LIP [ZP [VP 111 Before we proceed, we have to make sure that the sentences in (29) actually instantiate ellipsis. With this goal in mind, I want to show that this Italian elliptical construction has the same properties as ellipsis in English. In particular, what we find in (29) is not the same thing as what we find in (31), called Bare Argument Ellipsis (see Reinhart, 1991; Von Fintel, 1993; Lappin, 1996 for analyses): (31) a. Carlo e venuto ma non Pietro. b. Charles has come, but not Peter. It has frequently been remarked that a crucial property that distinguishes ellipsis proper from other forms of implicit or reduced discourse is that ellipsis can be found in subordinate clauses. Compare the sentences in (32): (32) a. Charles has come, but I think Peter hasn™t. b. *Charles has come, but I think not Peter. In Italian, (33a) is grammatical, just as the English example (32a) is grammatical. Also, (33b) is ungrammatical, again like its corresponding English example (32b): (33) a. Carlo e venuto, ma credo cbe Pietro no. ‚Carlo has come, but I-think that Pietro not™ b. *Carlo e venuto, ma credo the non Pietro. ‚Carlo has come. but I-think that not Pietro™ The next step is to show that it is also different from other VP-anaphors like the Eng- lish ‚do it™ and ‚do so™ pro-forms. Ellipsis and these other types of anaphors differ in that VPE can have a wh-trace and the others cannot (as first noted by Haik, 1987, see also Lappin, 1996): (34) a. I know which book Fred read, but I don™t know which one Bill did. b. *I know which book Fred read, but I don™t know which one Bill did so. Italian ellipsis can include wh-traces: (35) Credo the Sue mi abbia detto quale film avesse visto, ma non mi ha detto quale no. I-think that S. me had said which film had seen, but not me said which not ‚I think Sue told me which movie she saw, but she didn™t tell me which one she didn™t™ I conclude that Italian VP-ellipsis is indeed an ellipsis construction. 196 L. Lbpez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 4.2. VP-ellipsis in Italian and D-linking Since a C word is sitting next to the ellipsis site, it seems that the obvious licen- sor for Italian VPE is the functional head X. Next, I claim that C can be D-linking. A C word, for instance ‚not™, can be used to affect the truth conditions of the sentence of which it is a constituent, as we can see in (36a) - an example of what is called sentential negation. But ‚not™ can also be used to affect the truth conditions of a previous proposition, as we can see in (36b): (36) a. Chris did not read War and Peace. b. -Did Chris read War and Peace? -No, I think not. Since the negative words that we find in (36b) affect the truth conditions of a propo- sition mentioned in the previous discourse, I assume that negation (or more generally C) can be a ‚narrow™ D-linking functional category like the ones we encountered above or, in other words, that C can have a feature that instructs it to find a discourse topic. In keeping with my hypothesis (8), I must show evidence that D-linking nega- tion licenses VP-ellipsis whereas non-D-linking negation does not. Italian is a good testing ground for my hypothesis, because in this language the two types of negation have different morphological expressions: non is used for sentential negation and IZO for D-linking negation, as can be seen in (37): (37) a. Carlo e venuto ma Pietro non 2 venuto. ‚Carlo has come but Pietro not has come™ b. -Carlo e venuto? -No. Credo di no. ‚No. I think not™ *no *non (29a), repeated here, shows that D-linking negation licenses VP-ellipsis in Italian. (29a) contrasts with (38), in which we can see that non-D-linking negation cannot license ellipsis in Italian: (29) a. Carlo i: venuto ma Pietro no. (38) *Carlo e venuto ma Pietro non. Thus, Italian VPE corroborates hypothesis (8).i5 I5 A related and interesting issue is whether (i) and (ii) also instantiate ellipsis, that is, whether they select for an empty category: (i) Credo di no. (ii) I think not. I believe it is plausible to assume this is possibly the case in (ii) but not in (i). ‚Not™ can select for sev- eral types of constituents forming reduced predicates which could probably be analyzed as small clauses: L. Lbpez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 4.3. VP-ellipsis in English 197 In this sub-section I propose that the head C also licenses VPE in English. With my analysis, I provide an account of the ungrammaticality of (6), repeated here: (6) *Chris has not read War and Peace, but Pat™s For a start, let me consider these two examples: (39) a. Sue promised to buy the tickets, but she did not [e]. b. Sue promised to buy the tickets, and she did\ [e]. In (39a), the elided category is sitting next to the negative head ‚not™. It is straight- forward to assume that ellipsis here is licensed by C. In (39b) we have an auxiliary with a full accent (which I indicate with a slash \). Accented auxiliaries - in sen- tences like ‚1 did love her™ - have been considered to bear an affirmative feature since Chomsky (1957). I follow Laka (1990: 83) and assume that accented auxil- iaries are C categories, so C also licenses VPE in (39b).‚(™ (iii) I think not in my apartament. (iv) I think not necessarily. Notice that in (iv) ‚not™ takes scope over the adverbial. Under the assumption that scope is the semantic effect of c-command, I conclude that there must be some syntactic structure in (iv). A plausible conse- quence is that such a syntactic structure is also present in (ii). The Italian word no is different in this respect. (v) and (vi) are ungrammatical with either no or non; when there is a pause after the word no , the sentence improves but no does not take scope over the adverb: I:;) *lo penso di no/non in il mio appartamento. *lo penso di no/non necessariamente. Thus, I think it is fair to assume that if there cannot be a full category following no in (i), and if we do not have other reasons to assume that it instantiates ellipsis, we should not assume there is an empty cat- egory (and I leave open how the sentence ends up getting an interpretation). This argument does not carry over to (29), since here we need at least a theta role assigner for the subject, which gives us a good reason to assume there is an empty predicate. Ih In L6pez (1995, 1997) I present some evidence for this assumption by showing that ‚do™ and stressed auxiliaries create minimality effects. Rizzi (1990) argues that the downstairs reading in (ia) is unavail- able because the intervening neg projects an A™ specifier that creates a minimality effect. Notice that in (ib) the auxiliary ‚do™ creates the same effect. The conclusion is that the affirmative morpheme also pro- jects an A™ specifier with the same properties as a negative A™ specifier. Similarly, Aoun and Li (1993) show that in (ic) the quantifier in object position cannot take scope over the subject, which they attribute to the intervention of an A™ operator associated with neg; in the example in (id), the auxiliary ‚does™ cre- ates the same effect (see Homstein, 1995: 168 for an alternative analysis): (i) a. It is for this reason that I do not believe t that [John was fired *t]. b. It is for this reason that I do believe t that [John was fired *t]. c. Someone does not love everyone. d. Someone does love everyone. As evidence that stressed auxiliaries also bear an affirmative Z feature, notice that the contracted auxil- iary in (iia,c) does not intervene in an A™ chain, whereas the stressed one in (iib,d) does: 198 L. Lopez I Lingua I10 (2000) 183-213 Consider now example (40): (40) Sue didn™t promise to buy the tickets. John did [e]. In (40) the auxiliary appears deaccented. On the basis of this example, Williams (1977: 107) claims that the auxiliary that is found in VPE cannot be identified with the auxiliary that is found in emphatic-assertive sentences or, in our terms, that the auxiliary in (40) does not have a C feature. However, it cannot be said that the aux- iliary that we find in VPE constructions is an ordinary auxiliary either, since it can™t be contracted (as show in 6). If Williams were right, we would have three different typemf auxiliaries: (i) C (accented) auxiliaries, (ii) ellipsis auxiliaries (which can appear accented or deac- cented but not contracted), (iii) ordinary auxiliaries (that appear reduced or con- tracted). However, I claim that the auxiliary that we find in (40) is a C head, despite appearances to the contrary. As explained in Lopez and Winkler (1998), the lack of strong accent is due to the rhythm rule (Liberman and Prince, 1977: 308-330), whose function is to avoid the clash that occurs between two adjacent syllables which are realized with equally strong accent. By interspersing additional material between the adjacent elements it can be easily recognized that both the subject and the auxiliary in (41) are prosodically marked by a pitch accent: (41) Susan hasn™t promised to buy the tickets. /John probably has\ The subject is assigned the typical topic accent L*+H (signaled by / for rise) and the auxiliary is assigned a H*L-L% tone sequence (signaled by \ for full), which in my terms indicates that we have a C auxiliary. Therefore, I maintain the claim that polar- ity focus licenses VPE in English even in examples like (39~) and (41). Since we saw with the Italian examples that C can be D-linking, English VPE is consistent with hypothesis (8).17 To conclude the first part of this paper: I have so far showed empirical evidence that elliptical categories are associated with a D-linking functional category, as expressed in hypothesis (8). In the following, I argue that elliptical categories adjoin (ii) a. It is for this reason that I™ve believed t that [John was fired™t]. b. It is for this reason that I HAVE believed t that [John was fired *t]. c. Someone™s loved everyone. d. Someone HAS loved everyone. I7 Three important issues are not discussed in section 5. The first one is the following: if C is what licenses VPE in English, why is (i) ungrammatical at all?: (i) *John bought the book but Peter not. Second, what analysis should be provided when several auxiliaries are overt, as in (ii)?: (ii) I know you bought it for me, but you should not have [e]. Finally, what licenses the ellipsis of infinitival verbs? : (iii) I know you want to see a movie tonight, but I don™t want to [e]. (i) is discussed in extenso in Lopez (1997) and (ii) and (iii) in Lopez (1995). Since this paper is already quite long, and running the risk of losing its focus, I take the freedom of referring the reader to those papers for details. L. Ldpez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 199 via head to head movement to the categories that license them and, therefore, that the elided category is within the Hﬂﬁﬂ structure of the licensing head, as in (8™). In section 5, I argue that the hypothesis that elliptical categories are unstructured pro-forms in the lexicon and the computational system is at least plausible. Building on this assumption, in section 6 I present my arguments for head to head movement of the elliptical category. These arguments are based on the Backwards Anaphora Constraint and the Coordinate Structure Constraint. Additionally, I hypothesise that this movement is connected with Kayne™s (1994) LCA. 5. The pro-form hypothesis Since Zagona (1982), a number of linguists have assumed that VPE is an empty constituent of category pro (Zagona, 1982, 1988; Brucart, 1986; Lobeck, 1987; Chao, 1988). Lobeck (1995) extends this assumption to NPE and Sluicing. In the principles and parameters model, pro is a base-generated empty category with a very specific condition on its licensing: proper government by a lexical head. In the case of VPE, the lexical head would be INFL filled with an auxiliary. In my terms, the assumption that elided constituents are pro-forms simply means that they are unstructured empty categories. Proper government has disappeared from the mini- malist tool-kit; however, I will show in section 6 that the proper licensing condition on VPE, NPE and Sluicing should be stated as in (8™), perfectly in line with mini- malist assumptions. The assumption that elided categories are pro-forms is not universally accepted. As I mentioned in section 4.1, Hail< (1987) noted that an elided VP may include the trace of a wh-word whereas the overt predicate pro-form ‚so™ does not: (42) a. I know what Peter has eaten, but I don™t know what John has. b. *I know what Peter has eaten, but I don™t know what John has done so. (42) seems to present evidence that elided VPs, unlike overt pro-forms, have an internal structure (see Lappin, 1996 for an argument along this line). Moreover, it is generally assumed that all the arguments of a predicate must either be found in a predicate internal position or bind a position within the maximal projection of this predicate; this suggests that for the subject to be interpretable, we need to have a full VP structure at some level of representation. However, these considerations do not necessarily lead one to reject the pro-form hypothesis. It can be argued that an elided constituent is syntactically a pro-form which is interpreted at LF by recycling linguistic material (as in Chung et al., 1995, see also Williams™ 1977 copy rule); this recycling would provide the empty category with internal structure and consequently with variables for the wh-word and the sub- ject to bind. As evidence for the plausibility of this assumption, I present the exam- ples in (43) to argue that this same process is at work for the interpretation of an uncontroversial empty pro-form such as the null subject of pro-drop languages. (43a) is an example in Spanish of a passive with SE. (43b) shows that in Spanish pro can 200 L. Lbpez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-2 I3 be the subject of a sentence. (43~) shows that you can™t delete a determinerless noun and leave the complement overt. (43d) shows that the complement of the noun can be extracted as a wh-word. Finally, (43e) shows that the null subject can include the trace of the wh-word: ‚* (43) a. b. C. d. e. Se vendieron retratos de Maria. Were sold portraits of Mary ‚Portraits of Mary were sold™ Se vendieron pro. ‚(They) were sold™ *Se vendieron de Maria. LDe quien pediste que se vendieran retratos? Of whom you-asked that were sold portraits? ‚Whose portraits did you ask to have sold? ™ LDe quien pediste que se vendieran? Of whom you-asked that were sold? ‚Whose did you ask to have sold?™ (43~) illustrates a restriction of Spanish NP syntax: we cannot have an overt com- plement and a silent noun if D is also empty - that is, (43~) would be grammatical with an overt definite determiner, as predicted by (8). What is interesting at this point is that this filter seems to be cancelled if the PP is a trace, as shown in (43e). (43~) and (43e) present us with an interesting paradox: a determinerless noun cannot be empty and its complement overt unless the complement is itself a trace. This is represented in (44) : (44) a. *lNp ]N e 1 ]rp de Maria1 1 ]43cl b. &r ]N e 1 ]PP t 11 ]43el A way out of this paradox is to assume that representation (44b) is incorrect and that what we have in (43e) is an unstructured pro both as a lexical item and through- out the derivation. If so, (43e) does not violate the filter exemplified in (44a). At LF, pro would be interpreted in the following manner: (i) a noun antecedent is copied in the place of pro - in the case at hand, the noun retratos ‚portraits™ - (ii) a variable is sprouted, in the sense of Chung et al. (1995), and this variable can be bound by the wh-word.‚9 Further, I assume that recycling cannot rescue ungrammatical represen- tations, so copying an antecedent noun in the place of [e] will not render (44a) gram- ‚s In (43e), there is no doubt that the wh-word must come from the subordinate clause rather than the main clause. (i) shows that in a pseudo-cleft construction pedir ‚ask for™ does not admit a prepositional phrase headed by de: (i) *Lo que pedi de Pedro es que vendiera el retrato. ‚What l-asked of Pedro is that he sell the portrait™ ﬂ Chung et al.‚s (1995) ‚Sprouting™ is an operation that builds structure after spell-out. They motivate this operation extensively in the context of Sluicing interpretation. L. Ldpez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 201 matical (this assumption should be uncontroversial, if recycling had this power, all languages would be pro-drop, contrary to fact). Thus, pro ends up having a branch- ing structure at LF, after all computations are finished. I suggest that the grammar handles empty pro-forms in general by providing them with full structure. In any case, the examples in (43) make more plausible the hypothesis that elided con- stituents are pro-forms that are interpreted by copying a chunk from the previous dis- course. Let us now explore a consequence of the pro analysis. Under the assumption that the lexicon does not store phrases (with the exception of idioms), I conclude that pro must be an Xﬂ. This gives us two possible syntactic configurations: either pro merges directly with the functional category that licenses it, as in (45a), or it merges with something else first, as represented in (45b): (45) a. b. pro F prop /A pro XP These possibilities are instantiated within VPs and NPs. In the realm of VP, we have VPE, discussed above, and also Pseudogapping (Levin, 1979). As mentioned in the introduction, pseudogapping has recently been argued by Jayaseelan ( 1990) and Lasnik (1995) to be a sub-species of VPE: (46) I cleaned the bathroom before Mike did [e] the kitchen. In (46), ‚did™ is F in (45b) and ‚the kitchen™ is XP. Within DPs, we find partial NP ellipsis stranding a complement or modifier (Jackendoff, 1977; Nerbonne et al., 1989, 1990): (47) I brought several [e] made in China. Here, ‚several™ is F and ‚made in China™ is XP. Partial sluicing, that is, merging of pro with a VP, does not seem to exist: (48) *What [e] you buy tomorrow? I assume that (48) is ungrammatical because the licensing conditions on the subject are such that it must enter a checking relation with finite Tense by spell-out. Since finite Tense is absent in (48), the subject is not licensed.*ﬂ 2(1 In gapping constructions, I assume that the absent material is deleted at PF. 202 L. L6pez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 From now on, I assume that elliptical categories are unstructured pro-forms and I build on this assumption on the following section. Additionally, in section 7, where I discuss analyses alternative to my own, I show that the PF-deletion analysis of ellipsis, which has earned some currency in recent years, is deeply flawed. 6. Licensing configuration The hypothesis with which I began only states that an elided category must be associated with a D-linking functional category. However, a second issue to be dis- cussed is in what configuration licenser and licensee must find themselves in order to license ellipsis. Here, I propose that the licensee must be included within the Hﬂﬂ of the licenser, as in (8™). Concretely, I argue that pro is adjoined to the licensing head by head-to-head movement. I present three arguments for movement: the first one concerns Backwards Anaphora Constraint in VPE, the second concerns Coordi- nate Structure Constraint in VPE and Sluicing, the third concerns intervention effects in NPE contexts. I start with VPE first. As Napoli (1985: 290) noticed, when sentence (49a) is turned into a question, as in (49b), the latter becomes ungrammatical: (49) a. Anyone who wants to leave, can [e]. b. *Can anyone who wants to leave t(can) [e]? In (49a), the antecedent of the elided VP is contained within the subject of the sen- tence. In (50a) the antecedent is the main clause predicate and the elided VP is part of the subject. The corresponding question, (50b), is grammatical: (50) a. Anyone who wants to [e] , can leave. b. Can anyone who wants to [e], t(can) leave? I account for the ungrammaticality of (49b) in the following manner: assume that the empty category pro adjoins to the auxiliary. When the auxiliary raises to C to form a question, the empty category c-commands the antecedent. This is represented in (51): (51) *[c Can+pro [Ip anyone who wants to leave t ]] ? This violates the Backwards Anaphora Constraint or whatever syntactic principle ensures that an anaphor does not c-command its antecedent. That ellipsis obeys the BAC has been known since Jackendoff (197 1): (52) *Sue didn™t [e], although John ate meat. Consider now (50b). The empty category is embedded within the complex subject and does not c-command its antecedent ‚leave™. The configuration is legal and the L. Ltipez i Linpia 110 (2ooO) 183-213 203 sentence is grammatical. I conclude that (49) and (50) provide evidence that the elided VP adjoins to the auxiliary.2™,22 Further evidence for this adjunction movement comes from island constraints, in particular, the Coordinate Structure Cons~aint (CSC). WilIiams (1977) discovered the following puzzle: (53) John didn™t immediately open the door; first he shut the window and then he did [ef. (54) *Not only can John play the harmonica, he will [e] and beat the drum simulta- neously. (Williams, 1977: 114) Williams argues that sentence (53) shows that the rule that interprets VPE does not obey the CSC, and further that this entails that VPE interpretation is not a Sentence Grammar rule. However, the ungr~maticality of (54) suggests that, on the contrary, VPE inte~retation must obey the CSC. Williams™ solution was to assume an opera- tion called f-subscript assignment, which was a sentence grammar rule and included both Aux and the elided VP in its formulation. Since f-subscript assignment is an SG rule, it must obey the CSC. However, the CSC is violated in (54) because it involves one of the terms of the coordination and an element outside of it. In my terms, the ungr~matic~ity of (54) has an obvious explanation: the empty category pro must adjoin to the auxiliary but this leads to a violation of the CSC, as represented in (55)?™ ?™ Napoli (1985) also provides an analysis of (49b) in terms of the BAC, under the assumpti~~n that auxiliaries are proforms. However, notice that this assumption leads to the incorrect prediction that (Sob) should also be ungrammatical. ﬂ The following sentence is also ungrammatical: (i) *Should [anyone who wants to leave] t have [e] already. This example shows that the elided category adjoins to the highest auxiliary rather than the closest one, suggesting that the highest auxiliary in a sequence of auxiliaries is the licenser of VPE. Other data cor- &orate this conclusion. As I have mentions in the main body of this paper, a contracted auxiliary can™t license VPE. (ii) shows that if the highest auxiliary is contracted, VPE is ungrammatical even if there is a subsequent full auxiliary: (ii) *Peter isn™t helping much, but John™s been [e].[cf: but John has been] However, if the empty category adjoins to the highest auxiliary, the Head Movement Constraint seems to be violated. I leave this problem for future research. ﬂ It is wo~hwhile to discuss two examples that are misleadingly similar to (54): (i) John didn™t enter the house; he [vp tried to [e]] but [vp couldn™t force the lock]. (ii) John likes to play the bagpipes; he often [1. does fe]] and [I™ sings along as well]. In (i), we have coordination of VP constituents, assuming that deontic medals are verbal heads that pro- ject their own phrases. (ii) involves coordination of I™ constituents (possibly IP, if the subject is topical- ized). as is evident by the fact that the verb ‚sings™ has its own agreement morphology. Notice that if the verb appears uninflected, forcing a VP-coordination analysis, the sentence degrades: (iii) *John likes to play the bagpipe; he often does [e] and sing along as welt. This is predicted by my analysis because the empty category would have to abandon a coordinate struc- ture to adjoin to the auxiliary. 204 cw L. L6pez i Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 Aux™ /\ A beat the drums We can use the CSC to search for evidence of movement in Sluicing as well. (56) shows that Sluicing is also sensitive to the CSC in exactly the precise way: coordi- nation of CPs is fine even if one includes a sluice, but coordination of IPs is ungram- matical if one of them is sluiced: (56) a. *There is a tape that he wants to buy and that she wants to rent, but I don™t know which tape [e] and she wants to rent. b. Mary said she wanted to burn the barn. Joan asked why [e], and at what time she would do it. Movement of pro in this case can be assumed as an instance of I-to-C movement. NPE turns out to be a little trickier. Coordination of an elided NP with a non- elided NP is ungrammatical, as predicted and shown in (57b). However, it turns out that coordination of DPs with elided NPs is also un~~ati~~, as shown in (58b): (57) a. Some more men came in, and most of the men and the women sat down. b. *Some more men came in. and most [e] and the women sat down. (58) a. Some more men came in, and most of the men and all of the women sat down. b. *Some more men came in, and most [e] and all of the women sat down. Thus, the best that one can say is that the NP-ellipsis data are consistent with the hypothesis that ellipsis respects the CSC without providing evidence for it. However, recall the contrast in (24), repeated here: (24) a. His cousins from New York are nicer than mine [e] from Minnesota. b. *His blonde cousins are nicer than mine brunette [e]. The ungrammatical&y of (24b) can now be accounted for if the adjective creates an intervention effect for N-to-D movement. L. Lbpez /Lingua 110 (2000) 1X3-213 20s Given all these facts, I think it is plausible to assume that in all instances of ellip- sis the elided category adjoins to the licensing functional category and that the initial hypothesis (8) can be rewritten as (8™): (8™) Elided constituents are licensed iff included in Hmax, H,o_,,nking,. It remains to be seen what motivates these various movements. On the strength of my discussion of (11) and (12), repeated here, it seems safe to assume that [D-link- ing] is an attracting feature: (11) a. Who knows what? b. *Who knows what the hell? ( 12) Who knows what Mary read to whom? (1 lb) shows that wh-words in situ must be D-linking. (12) is ambiguous because ‚to whom™ can pair up with either of the two other wh-words. If a [wh] feature were the only attracting feature in C, ‚to whom™ could not raise to the highest CP without vio- lating ‚Shortest Move™. However, if the highest C has a [D-linking] feature, it can attract the lowest wh-phrase without violating ‚Shortest Move™. (12) also shows that [D-linking] does not necessarily attract overtly. However, there might be a good reason to assume that pro does move by spell-out. As a mat- ter of fact, Chomsky™s (1995: 241-249) Bare Phrase Structure makes overt move- ment of pro obligatory. Let us see how.24 In traditional X™ Theory, the type of movement that I am arguing for would be banned: pro would be an XP; I, C and D are Xﬂ, and movement of an XP into an X0 has commonly been assumed to be illicit. However, in Chomsky™s Bare Phrase Structure system this movement is available. Consider the following configuration that represents the situation in which a pro-form has merged with a functional head and the latter has projected; pro has not adjoined to Hﬂ yet: (59) H™ Hﬂ Pro pro does not have any complements or specifiers, which means that it has been merged with an ambiguous status: it is both minimal and maximal. Since it is mini- mal, it can adjoin to Hﬂ. Chomsky assumes the core of Kayne™s (1994) theory of phrase structure: (i) the Linear Correspondence Axiom (LCA): every terminal element in a tree must be ordered; and (ii) this linear ordering is imposed by asymmetric c-command of the nodes that immediately dominate the terminal nodes (i.e. if node A that immediately l4 The following discussion concerns only VPE, NPE and sluicing, not partial ellipsis. dominates the terminal node a asymetrically c-commands the node B that immedi- ately dominates b, then a and b are ordered (a is to the left of b). The configuration in (59) violates the LCA: since pro and Ho c-command each other, no ordering is defined between them. Chomsky (1995 : 249) discusses another instance of the same structure: Romance pronominal clitics. According to Chomsky, a pronominal clitic is a non-projecting D which is the complement of a main verb, violating the LCA. His solution is to propose that the LCA is a PF condition; thus, if the clitic raises overtly to adjoin to the verb or to some functional projection and the trace left behind is deleted at PF, then a verb can have a non-projecting complement and still respect the LCA at PF. As for the adjunction structure, it creates a new word; since morphological structure, by assumption, does not have the same constraints as phrase structure, it is not affected by the LCA. Without any addenda, this solution can be applied to the structure in (59): overt movement of pro is required by the LCA in the Bare Phrase Structure System because it is both m~imal and maximal. According to Chomsky, the LCA is a PF condition. If (overt) pro adjunction is triggered by the LCA, then we must conclude that PF conditions affect silent cate- gories. Chomsky actually assumes the contrary, that empty categories are unaffected by PF conditions, to ensure that traces are immune to the LCA. Let us assume, con- tra Chomsky, that pro is sensitive to PF conditions like the LCA. The objective now is to find a way to maintain that silent categories are sensitive to PF conditions, at the same time ensuring that traces are immune to the LCA. The crucial assumption that I propose is the following: chains are legitima~ PF objects (just as in LF). As a consequence, if the head of a chain satisfies the LCA, the entire chain is fine. The question that we have here is whether we have independent evidence that chains are PF objects. Selkirk (1994) presents some interesting evidence that PF rep- resentations must be able to read traces. A general rule of focus projection is that focus-marking on the internal argument of the verb projects to the verb itself, but focus on the subject does not (Selkirk, 1994: 555). An example is given in (60). In (6Oa), the direct object is accented and focussed, and the focus can be projected upward, so that (6Oa) is a good answer to the question ‚what happened?‚. On the other hand, in (60b) the subject is accented and focussed, so (60b) cannot answer the question ‚what happened? ™ : (60) a. John bought the BOOK. b. JOHN bought the book. (61) seems to be an exception to this rule, since focus on the subject actually pro- jects in this example: (6 1) JOHNSON died. The exception is accounted for by Selkirk if (i) we assume that the subject of the unaccusative verb ‚die™ is base-generated in a VP internal position and (ii) focus marking on a constituent licenses focus marking on its trace, from which it can pro- ject upwards. The same idea can be apptied to (62), where again focus on the wh- word licenses focus projection: L. Lbpez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 207 (62) What BOOKS has Helen reviewed t? Thus, (61) and (62) are clear evidence that chains are PF objects. Consequently, it can be assumed that traces are immune to the LCA not because they are phonetically empty but because the head of the chain satisfies the LCA and the entire chain is a legitimate PF object. Therefore, there is no obstacle for the assumption that pro is sensitive to the LCA. To conclude, I have shown that we have both empirical and theoretical reasons to hypothesize that the elliptical pro-form adjoins to a higher category. Moreover, adjunction puts pro within the checking domain of a functional head, which is the only licensing condition acknowledged in the Minimalist Program. My analysis raises an interesting question, namely, if the null subjects of pro-drop languages should also be regarded as clitics. The logic of my analysis suggests that they should and, interestingly, Rigau (1988) did show that Romance null subjects and pronominal clitics share enough properties that they can be classified in the same category. Two independent lines of research have thus converged to the same conclusion, a satisfying result. 7. Previous analyses The syntax of VPE has been the focus of some attention in the last 15 years or so, and a few analyses for its licensing have been put forward (Zagona, 1982, 1988; Lobeck, 1987, 1995; Chao, 1988). All of these works have in common that they use the notion of Head-Government to analyze the relation between the head I and its complement VP that allow the latter to be elided. Lobeck (1995) is the only one that puts together all the different forms of ellipsis into one analysis. Therefore, it seems appropiate to review her theory and contrast it with the one I am presenting here. Then, I briefly discuss Sleeman™s (1996) and Johnson™s (1997) analyses, based on assumptions fairly close to mine. Finally, I discuss the PF-deletion hypothesis (Chomsky, 1993: 35; Chomsky and Lasnik, 1993; Tancredi, 1992). Lobeck™s theory can be summarized in the statements in (63). She considers ellip- tical categories to be instances of pro: (63) a. An empty, non-arbitrary pronominal must be properly head-governed, and identified by an X0 specified with strong agreement (Lobeck, 1995: 20). b. An Xﬂ is specified for strong agreement if X0 or the head or the phrase with which it agrees, morphologically realizes agreement in a productive number of cases (Lobeck, 1995: 51). c. An X0 is specified for agreement iff its features must be shared with those of another X0 or XP under government (Lobeck, 1995: 51). Lobeck uses a broad definition of agreement that allows her to account for a consid- erable data base. I will not try to contrast her approach and mine in terms of empir- ical coverage - which would take too long - but rather in theoretical, conceptual 208 L. Lipez I Lingua 110 ~2#0~ 183-213 terms. Take Sluicing, for instance. She observes that empty IPs are licensed when there is a wh-word in spec,CP; further, she argues that a wh-word and a Co head both have a [wh] feature in a spec-head agreement relation; when this agreement relation is in place, an empty IP is licensed. Though this works out for a broad range of cases - except for the ‚what the hell™ cases discussed above - two questions remain: (i) why should the [wh] feature be involved in ellipsis?, and (ii) why should agreement between a head and its spec have anything to do with licensing the com- plement of the head? Shouldn™t there be a sharing of features between the licensing head and the elided category instead? To take a different example, we know that the person and number features of INFL may license an empty subject; however this is so because this empty pronominal shares these features with INFL and, presumably, these features make it easy for the empty pronominal to find an antecedent. But in Lobeck™s analysis of Sluicing, we are missing this kind of intuitive motivation. On the other hand, under my approach, D-linking functional categories license ellipsis, as in (8™). This provides a clear motivation for licensing, since the raison d™etre of this feature is precisely to connect with a discourse topic, which is crucial for the interpretation of the empty category. On these grounds, it seems that my theory should be preferred. Moreover, licensing of the empty category takes place in the checking domain of the functional category that licenses it and the relevant feature sharing is between the empty category and its licenser. Finally, I would like to point out that my analysis, that makes no use of head-government, can be easily integrated within the Minimalist Program. Sleeman (1996) and Johnson (1997) are two recent approaches that make an effort to include discourse considerations in their analyses. Sleeman discusses empty nouns in French in depth and makes some observations on the equivalent construction in English. As mentioned in footnote 12, she bases her analyses on the notion of speci- ficity arriving at the same conclusions that I have. However, she does not try to extend her insights to other ellipsis constructions nor does she define the licensing configuration as I have done here in (8™). Johnson (1997) discusses VPE in English (he does not mention other forms of ellipsis). He proposes that VPE is licensed as a discourse topic, in an analysis paral- lel to what Huang (1984) proposed for null objects in Chinese. His proposal is dif- ferent from mine because he does not require a close connection between a certain type of functional category and the elided constituent. Johnson remarks that the trace of a topicalized VP needs to be governed by an auxiliary, as is the case with VP-ellipsis: (64) a. Charles often arrived late, but Peter would not. b. Arrive late, Peter would not. Since VP-topicalization and VP-ellipsis seem to have similar constraints on their occurrence, Johnson concludes that elided VPs are licensed by topicalization. How- ever, VP-ellipsis and VP-topicalization do not match as closely as Johnson suggests. For instance, VP-ellipsis may involve an auxiliary whereas VP-topicalization may not: L. Lbpez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 209 (65) a. Chris could be arriving late, but Pat couldn™t. b. *Be arriving late, Pat couldn™t. Moreover, since English has both overt VP-topicalization and overt object-topical- ization (the famous ‚beans, I like™ example), it is somewhat surprising that English has covert VP-topicalization (i.e. VPE) but not covert object-topicalization (i.e. object drop, as in Chinese). In conclusion, although I agree with Johnson™s main intuition, it seems that the technical implementation cannot be drawn as a parallel to VP-topicalization. Instead, as I argue in the previous section, the evidence indicates that the elided VP is adjoined to the licensing category. In recent years, the original approach to ellipsis as a deletion rule has attracted some attention (see particularly Chomsky and Lasnik, 1993; Chomsky, 1993; Tan- credi, 1992), so it seems necessary to mention it briefly. Their proposal can be sum- marized thus: an elliptical sentence like (66a) is derived from a full sentence like (66b), in which the bracketed material receives a distinct low intonation (I indicate deaccenting with smaller characters), by means of an optional PF operation that deletes redundant material under a parallelism requirement: (66) a. John said he was looking for a cat, and so did Bill. b. John said he was looking for a cat, and so did Bill [say that he was looking for a cat]. Thus, according to this hypothesis, ellipsis comes about as resulting from deletion of deaccented material. However, counterexamples to this hypothesis are easy to find. We find elliptical predicates in contexts where deaccenting is ungrammatical: (67) a. Although John didn™t [e], Mary got tickets for the concert anyway. b. *Although John didn™t [get tickets for the concert], Mary got tickets for the concert anyway. Moreover, not everything that can be deaccented can be elided. For instance, in (68) we can see that an object DP can be deaccented but not elided, even if the paral- lelism requirement is met: (68) a. JOHN has bought the book and PETER [has bought the book] too. b. JOHN has bought the book and PETER [e] too. c. John BOUGHT the book, but he did not LIKE [the book]. d. *John BOUGHT the book, but he did not LIKE ]e]. If deaccented VPs can be elided, it is somewhat mysterious that deaccented DPs can- not. Finally, the ellipsis-deaccenting correlation does not hold crosslinguisticaly either. As we saw above, Italian allows for VPE; however, deaccenting of predicates is not possible in this language. German gives us the opposite situation: deaccenting is possible but ellipsis is not (Susanne Winkler, personal communication). 210 L. L6pez / Lingua II0 (2000) 183-213 I conclude that the PF-deletion theory of ellipsis is problematic, thus reaffirming the plausibility of the the pro-form hypothesis.25 8. Further discussion and conclusions The sentences in (69), taken from earlier sections, were said to be ungrammatical because the functional category sitting next to the ellipsis site is not D-linking: (69) a. *I know Pat wants to buy something but I don™t know what the hell. b. *Some men are decent but every is not. c. *Carlo i: venuto ma Pietro non. d. *I haven™t said that, but Mary™s. In this section, I summarize my main conclusions concerning the ungrammaticality of (69). Suppose an LF representation in which there is an elided constituent. In principle, this should be disallowed as a violation of Full Interpretation, unless a linguistic antecedent is recycled from the previous discourse and copied in the position of the elided constituent. Several explicit analyses for ellipsis resolution have been pro- posed in the last twenty years, some of which have used some sort of discourse model: Asher (1993) Hardt (1993), Klein (1987), Prtist et al. (1993), among others. Since it is not my purpose to elucidate which one is to be preferred, I will simply assume that (i) the antecedent is stored in a discourse model as a property, (ii) the elided category is also stored, as a property variable and (iii) the stored antecedent is linked to the property variable. Take the simplest possible example: (70) Mary saw Susan. Chris did too. (71a) shows a Discourse Representation Structure (DRS) for the first sentence. To the left of the vertical bar are the discourse referents, to the right are the conditions on those referents. Notice that a property can be analyzed as a discourse referent. (71 b) shows a DRS for the second sentence: (71) a. lui, ~2, P 1 Mary(q), SusNu2), P=kd([saw(x,u2>1 )@,>I, saw@,, u2)l b. [u3, Q 1 ChrWJ, did&, Q)l So, in (71b), Q is a discourse marker that is not interpreted within the same clause. Q is a property variable, which needs to be linked to another property in order to be Moreover, Rooth (1992) notices that the interpretations of elided predicates and deaccented ones are not always strictly parallel. For instance, in (i), there is no sloppy reading, but in (ii) there is: (i) Yesterday, John™s friends paid off his debts, and today Bill did. (ii) Yesterday, John™s friends paid off his debts, and today Bill paid off his debts. (Rooth, 1992: 19) See Rooth™s article for discussion of these and other examples. L. Ldpez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 211 interpreted. By merging the DRSs (71a) and (71b), Q can be linked to P. The result is the following: (72) [u,, u2, P, us, Q 1 Maryh), SusanCud, P=W([saw(wdl XuJl, sawCut, ud, ChMu3), doh Q), Q=M([sawWdl Nu3>l, saw(u3, u2)1 (72) is very simplified, but sufficient for our purposes. See the references mentioned above for more sophisticated approaches. My proposal in this paper is that adjunction to a D-linking functional category is a necessary condition for the licensing of an elided category. We can now under- stand this condition as holding of LF representations that include an elided category for those LFs to build a DRS, a representation like (72). The assumption is that a phonetically empty property variable cannot access a discourse model by itself. However, a D-linking functional head does have the ability to do so because, as I mentioned above, the ‚D-linking™ feature consists of the instruction ‚look for a dis- course topic™. By adjoining to the head that bears the D-linking feature, thus becom- ing part of this head™s Hﬂﬁﬁ, the empty category can ‚look into™ the discourse model and find an appropriate antecedent that can be linked to. A D-linking head may be regarded as a ﬁhookﬂ that the elided VP needs to find this antecedent. In all the sen- tences in (69), the elided constituents do not have this hook, consequently they can™t find an antecedent and cannot be interpreted. The sentences in (69) are ungrammat- ical because they violate Full Interpretation. As I suggested at the introduction, understanding the syntactic restrictions on ellipsis involves looking at the interface between Sentence Grammar and Discourse Grammar. References Abney, S., 1987. The English noun phrase in its sentential aspect, Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Aoun, J. and Y.A. Li, 1993. Syntax of scope. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press. Asher, N.. 1993. Reference to abstract objects in discourse. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Bernstein, J., 1993. The syntactic role of word markers in null nominal constructions. Probus 5, 5-38. Brucart, J.-M., 1986. La elision sinmctica en Espatiol. Barcelona: Promotions Publications UAB. Carstens, V., 1991. The syntax of DP in Kiswahili. Ph.D. dissertation, IJCLA, Los Angeles, CA. Chao, W., 1988. On ellipsis. New York: Garland. Chomsky, N., 1957. Syntactic structures. The Hague: Mouton. Chomsky, N., 1993. A minimalist program for linguistic theory, In: K. Hale and J. Keyser, (eds.), The view from building 20, l-53. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1995. Categories and transformations. In: The minimalist program.: 219-394. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky N. and H. Lasnik, 1993. Principles and parameteres theory. In: J. JacobsA. von Stechow, W. Stemefeld and T. Vennemann (eds.). Syntax: An international handbook of contemporary research. Berlin, De Gruyter. Chung, S., W. Ladusaw and J. McCloskey, 1995. Sluicing and logical form. Natural Language Seman- tics 3, 239-282. Contreras, H., 1989. On Spanish empty N™ and N*. In: Carl Kirschner and J. DeCesaris (eds.). Studies in Romance linguistics, 83-96. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 212 L. Ldpez i Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 Drubig, H., 1994. Island constraints and the syntactic nature of focus and association with focus. Arbeitspapiere des Sonderforschungsbereichs, University of Tubingen, Germany. Enc, M., 1991. The semantics of specificity. Linguistic Inquiry 22, I-25. Fintel, K. von, 1993. Exceptive constructions. Natural Language Semantics 1, 123-148. Fintel, K. von, 1994. Restriction on quantifier domains. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Massachussets, Amherst, MA. Distributed by GSLA. Ginzburg, J., 1992. Questions, queries and facts: A semantics and pragmatics for interrogatives. Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University, Stanford, CA. Haik, I., 1987. Bound VPs that need to be. Linguistics and Philosophy 10, 503-530. Hankamer, J., 1978. On the transformational derivation of some null VP anaphors. Linguistic Inquiry 9, 6674. Hardt, D., 1993. Verb phrase ellipsis: Form meaning and processing. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Harris, J., 1991. The exponence of gender in Spanish. Linguistic Inquiry 22, 27-62. Heim, I., 1982. The semantics of definite and indefinite noun phrases. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Massachussets, Amherst, MA. Hornstein, N., 1995. Logical form. New York: Blackwell. Howard, H., 1993. CP, affected inversion and topicalization in English and Spanish. Ph.D. dissertation, Cornell University. Huang, C.-T.J., 1984. On the distribution and reference of empty pronouns. Linguistic Inquiry 15, 53 l-574. Jackendoff, R., 1971. Gapping and related rules. Linguistic Inquiry 2( 1): 21-30. Jackendoff, R., 1977. X™ syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Jayaseelan, K.A., 1990. Incomplete VP-deletion and gapping. Linguistic Analysis 20, 64-81. Johnson, K., 1997. What VP-ellipsis can do, and what it can™t, but not why. Manuscript, University of Massachussets, Amherst, MA. Kayne, 1994. The antisymmetry of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. King, N., 1970. On blocking the rules for contraction in English. Linguistic Inquiry 1, 134-136. Klein, E., 1987. VP ellipsis. In: DR theory. In: Groenendijk, de Jongh and Stokhof (eds.), Studies in DRT and the theory of generalized quantifiers, 161-187. Dordrecht: Foris. Laka, I., 1990. Negation in syntax. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Lappin, S., 1996. The interpretation of ellipsis. In: S. Lappin (ed.), Handbook of contemporary seman- tic theory, 145-175. New York: Blackwell. Lasnik, H., 1995. A note on pseudogapping. In: R. Pensalfini and H. Ura (eds.), Papers on minimalist syntax. MIT working papers in linguistics 27, 143-164. Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Levin, N., 1979. Main verb ellipsis in spoken English. Ohio State University working papers in linguis- tics 24, 65-165. Department of Linguistics, OSU, Columbus, OH. Liberman, M. and A. Prince, 1977. On stress and linguistic rythm. Linguistic Inquiry 8, 249-336. Lobeck, A., 1987. Syntactic constraints on VP ellipsis. Indiana University Linguistics Club, Blooming- ton, IN. Lobeck, A., 1993. Strong agreement and identification: Evidence from ellipsis in English. Linguistics 31, 777-811. Lobeck, A., 1995. Ellipsis. New York: Oxford University Press. Longobardi, G., 1994. Reference and proper names. Linguistic Inquiry, 25: 609466. Lopez, L., 1995. Polarity and predicate anaphora. Ph.D. dissertation, Cornell University. L6pez, L., 1997. VP-ellipsis in English and Spanish and the features of auxiliaries. Manuscript, Univer- sity of Missouri. To appear in Probus. Lopez, L. and S. Winkler, 1998. Information structure in VP-Anaphora. Manuscript, University of Mis- souri-Columbia and Universitat Tubingen. To appear in Linguistics. Napoli, D.J., 1985. Verb phrase deletion: A base generated analysis. Linguistics 21, 281-319. Nerbonne, J., M. Iida and W. Ladusaw, 1989. Running on empty: Null heads in head-driven grammar. In: E.J. Fee and K. Hunt (eds.), Proceedings of West Coast Conference of Formal Linguistics 8, 276288. Stanford Linguistics Association, Stanford University, Stanford, CA. L. Ldpez I Lingua 110 (2000) 183-213 213 Nerbonne, J., M. Iida and W. Ladusaw, 1990. Semantics of common noun phrase anaphora. In: Pro- ceedings of West Coast Conference of Formal Linguistics 9, 379-394. Stanford Linguistics Associa- tion, Stanford University, Stanford, CA. Pesetsky, D., 1987. Wh-in-situ: Movement and unselective binding. In: E. Remand and G.B. ter Meulen (eds.). The Representation of (1n)defimiteness: 98-129. Cambridge. MA: MIT Press. Pollock, J.Y., 1989. Verb movement, universal grammar and the structure of IP. Linguistic Inquiry 20, 365-433. Prince, E., 1992. The ZPG letter: Subjects, definiteness and information-status. In: S Thompson and W. Mann (eds.), Discourse description: Diverse analysis of a fundraising text: 295-325. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Priist, H., R. Scha and M. van den Berg, 1993. Discourse grammar and verb phrase grammar. Linguis- tics and Philosophy 17, 261-327. Ramos-Santacruz, M., 1996. On the nature of discourse ellipsis: Evidence from sluicing. Paper pre- sented at the LSA annual meeting. Reinhart, T., 1991. Elliptic conjunctions-non-quantificational LF. In: A. Kasher (ed.), The Chomskian Turn: 360-384. New York: Blackwell. Rigau, G., 1988. Strong pronouns. Linguistic Inquiry 19, 503-5 11. Rizzi, L., 1990. Relativized minimality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Rota, F., 1996. La determination y la modificacidn nominal en Espaiiol. Ph.D. dissertation. UAB, Barcelona, Spain. Rooth, M., 1992. Ellipsis redundancy and reduction redundancy. In: S. Berman and A. Hestvik (eds.), Proceedings of the Stuttgart Ellipsis Workshop. I-19. Universitat Stuttgart, Germany. Ross, J.R., 1967. Constraints on variables in syntax. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Ross, J.R., 1969. Guess who. In: R. Binnick (ed.), Proceedings of the Fifth Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society, 252-286. University of Chicago, Chicago, IL. Sag, I., 1976. Deletion and logical form. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Selkirk, E., 1994. Sentence prosody: Intonation, stress, and phrasing. In: J. Goldsmith (ed.), The hand- book of phonological theory, 55tX569. New York: Blackwell. Sleeman, P.. 1996. Licensing empty nouns in French. Amsterdam: Holland Insitute of Generative Lin- guistics. Stroik, T., 1999. Superiority effects and adjunct referentiality in English multiple-wh constructions. Manuscript, University of Missouri, MO. Stump, G., 1981. The semantic variability of absolute constructions. Ph.D. Dissertation. Ohio State Uni- versity, Columbus, OH. Tancredi, C., 1992. Deletion, deaccenting and presupposition. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Ward, G. and B. Bimer, 1995. Definiteness and the English existential. Language 71, 722-742. Wasow, T., 1972. Anaphoric relations in English. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Williams, E., 1977. Discourse and logical form. Linguistic Inquiry 8, 101-139. Williams, E., 1997. Blocking and anaphora. Linguistic Inquiry 28, 577-628. Zagona, K., 1982. Government and proper government of verbal projections. Ph.D. dissertation, Univer- sity of Washington, Seattle, WA. Zagona, K., 1988. Proper government of antecedentless VP in English and Spanish. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 6, 95-128. Zanuttini, R., 1991. Syntactic properties of sentential negation: A comparative study of the romance lan- guages Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Zwicky, A. and G. Pullum, 1983. Cliticization vs. inflection: English ‚n™t™. Language 59, 503-5 13. 