ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 www.elsevier.com/locate/lingua Survey of books A selected and annotated bibliography of recent publications in linguistics Organizing Editors VCronique van Gelderen, Ineke van der Meulen* Department of French, Leiden University, P.O. Box 9515,230O RA Leiden, the Netherlands CONTENTS 1. Title-author index 2. Discipline/area index 3. Category index . 4. Language index 5. The survey 1. TITLE-AUTHOR INDEX Adverbs and Functional Heads - Cinque Algebraic Semantics in Language and Philosophy - Link Anaphora, Discourse, and Understanding - Comish Basic Color Terms - Berlin and Kay Child Language - Peccei Chomsky - Smith Code-Switching in Conversation - Auer Cognition and Function in Language - Fox, Jurafsky and Michaelis * E-mail: a.c.van.der.meulen@let.leidenuniv.nl 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter 0 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00053-X 842 Survey of books I Lingua 1 I1 (2001) 841-894 Comparative Study of Bantu Noun Classes - M&o Complex Predicates and Information Spreading in LFG - Andrews and Manning Consequences of Antisymmetry - Bianchi Coverbs and Complex Predicates in Wagiman - Wilson Definitions - Cormack Determinants dans la reference nominale et les conditions de leur absence - Curat Diachronic Studies of English Complementation Patterns - Rudanko Discourse in Late Modernity - Chouliaraki and Fairclough Discursive Construction of National Identity - Wodak, de Cillia, Reisigl, and Liebhart Eloquence in Trouble - Wilce Emotions across Languages and Cultures - Wierzbicka English for Sale - Hermeren English in Nineteenth-century England - Gorlach Essentials of Early English - Smith Flussgebiet der Have1 - Wauer Fonctions syntaxiques et roles semantiques - Amiot, de Mulder, Flaux and TenchCa Fonologia generativa contemporanea de la lengua espariola - Nufiez and Morales-Front Foundations of Cognitive Grammar - Langacker Fragments - Lappin and Benmamoun Function, Selection, and Innateness - Kirby Grammar Writer™s Cookbook - Butt, King, NiiIo and Segond Handbook of Language and Ethnic Identity - Fishman Historische Veranderungen prosodischer Strukturen - Ramers Historical Semantics and CogniGon - Blank and Koch Indian Epigraphy - Salomon Intonation, le systtme du francais - Rossi Introducing Transformational Grammar - Ouhalla Introduction to Discourse Analysis - Gee Korean Language - Sohn Language Creation and Language Change - DeGraff Languages DifSerent in All their Sounds - Nowak Language, Education, and Culture - Rahman Language in Time of Revolution - Harshav Languages of Native North America - Mithun Language: The Basics - Trask Lexical Acculturation in Native American Languages - Brown Lexical and Constructional Aspects of Linguistic Explanation - Webelhuth, Koenig, Kathol Lexical Approach to Italian Cliticization - Monachesi Lexical Relations - Koenig Lexical Strata in English - Giegerich Linguistic Diversity in Space and Time - Nichols Local Constraints vs. Economy - Johnson and Lappin Survey of books I Lingua Ill (2001) 841-894 Local Literacies - Waters 843 Middle Egyptian - Allen Modal Verbs in Danish - Brandt New Italian Studies in Linguistic Historiography - Gambara and Formigari One-Sided Arguments - Walton On Language - Humboldt Optima@ Theory - Kager Optimizing Structure in Context - Choi Origins of Complex Language - Carstairs-McCarthy Pedagogy and the Shaping of Consciousness - Christie People, Countries, and the Rainbow Serpent - McKnight Philosophy of Psychology - Botterill and Carruthers Phonetics - Ball and Rahilly Powers of Genre - Seitel Pragmatics - Peccei Prosody-Morphology Znter$ace - Kager, van der Hulst and Zonneveld Reference Grammar of Dutch - Fehringer Reference Grammar of Spoken Tamil- Schiffman Reverse English Dictionary - Muthmann Rhetorical Figures in Science - Fahnestock Selected Papers on Indo-European Linguistics - Rasmussen Semantics and Syntax in Lexical Functional Grammar - Dahymple Semiotic Insights - Rauch Sintaxis y semantica de1 movimiento - Cifuentes Honrubia Sprachformen - Wagener et al. Structure of Tone - Bao Syntactic Nuts - Culicover Syntactic Theory - Borsley Syntactic Theory - Sag and Wasow Syntax of Negation in Russian - Brown Systemes verbaux - Bentolila Talking about Treatment - Roberts Temporal Deixis in Welsh and Breton - Heinecke Think Generic! - Cohen ijbersetzung in der Unterrichtspraxis - Bemecker and Umlauf Urban Voices - Foulkes and Docherty Verb Movement and the Syntax of Kashmiri - Bhatt Women, Language, and Linguistics - Falk Word-Order Based Grammar - Koktova 844 Survey of books / Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 2. DISCIPLINE/AREA INDEX (AUTHOR, SHORT TITLE) ACQUISITION Culicover, Syntactic Nuts Peccei, Child Language Waters, Local Literacies APPLIED LINGUISTICS Allen, Middle Egyptian Bemecker and Umlauf, Obersetzung in der Unterrichtspraxis Butt et al., A Grammar Writer's Cookbook Fehringer, Reference Grammar of Dutch Schiffman, Reference Grammar of Spoken Tamil COMMUNICATION AND LANGUAGE USE Auer, Code-Switching in Conversation Chouliaraki and Fairclough, Discourse in Late Modernity Christie, Pedagogy and the Shaping of Consciousness Fahnestock, Rhetorical Figures in Science Fishman, Handbook of Language and Ethnic Identity Fox et al., Cognition and Function in Language Gee, Introduction to Discourse Analysis Hermer6n, English for Sale Peccei, Pragmatics Rahman, Language, Education, and Culture Rauch, Semiotic Insights Roberts, Talking about Treatment Walton, One-Sided Arguments Wierzbicka, Emotions across Languages and Cultures Wilce, Eloquence in Trouble Wodak et al., Discursive Construction of National Identity DIACHRONIC LINGUISTICS Blank and Koch, Historical Semantics and Cognition G6rlach, English in Nineteenth-century England Ramers, Historische Verginderungen prosodischer Strukturen Rudanko, Diachronic Studies of English Complementation Patterns Smith, Essentials of Early English Wauer, Flussgebiet der Havel DESCRIPTIVE LINGUISTICS Bentolila, Systdmes verbaux Survey of books I Lingua Ill (2001) 841-894 845 Berlin and Kay, Basic Color Terms Brand& Modal Verbs in Danish Heinecke, Temporal Deixis in Welsh and Breton M&night, People, Countries, and the Rainbow Serpent Maho, Comparative Study of Bantu Noun Classes Mithun, The Languages of Native North America Now&, Languages DifSerent in All their Sounds Rasmussen, Selected Papers on Indo-European Linguistics Sohn, The Korean Language HISTORY OF LINGUISTICS Falk, Women, Language, and Linguistics LANGUAGE EVOLUTION AND LANGUAGE CHANGE Brown, Lexical Acculturation in Native American Languages Carstairs-McCarthy, Origins of Complex Language DeGraff, Language Creation and Language Change Harshav, Language in Time of Revolution Humboldt, On Language Kirby, Function, Selection, and Innateness Trask, Language: The Basics MORPHOLOGY Giegerich, Lexical Strata in English Kager et al., The Prosody-Morphology Interface PHILOLOGY Gambara and Formigari, New Italian Studies in Linguistic Historiography Salomon, Indian Epigraphy Seitel, Powers of Genre Wagener et al., Sprachformen PHONOLOGY Bao, The Structure of Tone Foulkes and Docherty, Urban Voices Nmiez and Morales-Front, Fonologia generativa contemporanea de la lengua espariola PHONETICS Ball and Rahilly, Phonetics SEMANTICS Amiot et al., Fonctions syntaxiques et roles semantiques 846 Survey of books / Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 Cifuentes Honrubia, Sintaxis y sem6ntica del movimiento Cohen, Think Generic. t Cornish, Anaphora, Discourse, and Understanding Curat, D~terminants dans la r#f~rence nominale et les conditions de leur absence Link, Algebraic Semantics in Language and Philosophy SYNTAX Amiot et al., Fonctions syntaxiques et roles s~mantiques Andrews and Manning, Complex Predicates and Information Spreading in LFG Bhatt, Verb Movement and the Syntax of Kashmiri Bianchi, Consequences of Antisymmetry Borsley, Syntactic Theory Brown, Syntax of Negation in Russian Choi, Optimizing Structure in Context Cifuentes-Honrubia, Sintaxis y sem6ntica del movimiento Cinque, Adverbs and Functional Heads Cormack, Definitions Koktova, Word-Order Based Grammar Lappin and Benmamoun, Fragments Monachesi, Lexical Approach to Italian Cliticization Nichols, Linguistic Diversity in Space and Time Rossi, Intonation, le systdme du franqais Webelhuth et al., Lexical and Constructional Aspects of Linguistic Explanation Wilson, Coverbs and Complex Predicates in Wagiman THEORY OF GRAMMAR Dalrymple, Semantics and Syntax in Lexical Functional Grammar Johnson and Lappin, Local Constraints vs. Economy Kager, Optimality Theory Koenig, Lexical Relations Langacker, Foundations of Cognitive Grammar Ouhalla, Introducing Transformational Grammar Sag and Wasow, Syntactic Theory Smith, Chomsky 3. CATEGORY INDEX BIBLIOGRAPHY Janse and Tol, Linguistic Bibliography for the Year 1995 DICTIONARY Muthmann, Reverse English Dictionary Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 Wauer, Flussgebiet der Have1 DISSERTATION 847 Choi, Optimizing Structure in Context Cohen, Think Generic! Cormack, Definitions EDITED VOLUMES/PROCEEDINGS Amiot et al., Fonctions syntaxiques et roles s&nuntiques Auer, Code-Switching in Conversation Bentolila, Systkmes verbaux Bemecker and Umlauf, obersetzung in der Unterrichtspraxis Blank and Koch, Historical Semantics and Cognition DeGraff, Language Creation and Language Change Fishman, Handbook of Language and Ethnic Identity Foulkes and Docherty, Urban Voices Fox et al., Cognition and Function in Language Garnbara and Formigari, New Italian Studies in Linguistic Historiography Kager et al., The Prosody-Morphology Inter$ace Lappin and Benmamoun, Fragments Nowak, Languages Different in All their Sounds Webelhuth et al., Lexical and Constructional Aspects of Linguistic Explanation FESTSCHRIFT Wagener et al., Sprachformen JOURNAL Bamberg and Cabe, Narrative Inquiry Beinum, van et al., Concepts and Transformation Bo, Lingua e Letteratura Bright, Written Language and Literacy CaillC, Babel Chevalier et al., Linguistice Investigationes Cifuentes Homubia, Estudios de Lingiiistica Cognitiva Dascal, Pragmatics and Cognition Dasgupta, Tonkin and van Oostendorp, Language Problems and Language Planning Draye, Leuvense Bijdragen Dutz and Schmitter, Beitriige zur Geschichte der Sprachwissenschaft Fujihara et al., Studies in English Literature Hansen, Copenhagen Studies in Language Koemer, Historiographia Linguistica Mey, Rask Moser-Mercer and Massaro, Interpreting Noyau, LZNX Schneider, English World-wide 848 Survey of books /Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 Sonneveld and Loening, Terminology Toury and Lambert, Target Vogeler et al., Tense and Aspect Wilbur, Sign Language and Linguistics Wilcox, Evolution of Communication GRAMMAR Sohn, The Korean Language MONOGRAPH Andrews and Manning, Complex Predicates and Information Spreading in LFG Bao, The Structure of Tone Berlin and Kay, Basic Color Terms Bhatt, Verb movement and the Syntax of Kashmiri Bianchi, Consequences of Antisymmetry Brandt, Modal Verbs in Danish Brown, Lexical Acculturation in Native American Languages Brown, Syntax of Negation in Russian Butt et al., A Grammar Writer's Cookbook Carstairs-McCarthy, Origins of Complex Language Chouliaraki and Fairclough, Discourse in Late Modernity Christie, Pedagogy and the Shaping of Consciousness Cifuentes Honrubia, Sintaxis y semfntica del movimiento Cinque, Adverbs and Functional Heads Cornish, Anaphora, Discourse, and Understanding Culicover, Syntactic Nuts Curat, D~terminants dans la r~f~rence nominale et les conditions de leur absence Dalryrnple, Semantics and Syntax in Lexical Functional Grammar Fahnestock, Rhetorical Figures in Science Falk, Women, Language, and Linguistics Giegerich, Lexical Strata in English G6rlach, English in Nineteenth-century England Harshav, Language in Time of Revolution Heinecke, Temporal Deixis in Welsh and Breton Hermer6n, English for Sale Johnson and Lappin, Local Constraints vs. Economy Kirby, Function, Selection, and Innateness McKnight, People, Countries, and the Rainbow Serpent Koenig, Lexical Relations Koktova, Word-Order Based Grammar Langacker, Foundations of Cognitive Grammar Link, Algebraic Semantics in Language and Philosophy Maho, Comparative Study of Bantu Noun Classes Mithun, The Languages of Native North America Monachesi, Lexical Approach to Italian Cliticization Nichols, Linguistic Diversity in Space and Time Rahman, Language, Education, and Culture Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 849 Ramers, Historische Veranderungen prosodischer Strukturen Rasmussen, Selected Papers on Indo-European Linguistics Rauch, Semiotic Insights Roberts, Talking about Treatment Rossi, Intonation, le systeme du franGais Rudanko, Diachronic Studies of English Complementation Patterns Salomon, Zndian Epigraphy Seitel, Powers of Genre Smith, Chomsky Walton, One-Sided Arguments Wierzbicka, Emotions across Languages and Cultures Wilson, Coverbs and Complex Predicates in Wagiman Wilce, Eloquence in Trouble Wodak et al., Discursive Construction of National Identity TEXTBOOK Allen, Middle Egyptian Ball and Rahilly, Phonetics Borsley, Syntactic Theory Botterill and Carruthers, The Philosophy of Psychology Fehringer, Reference Grammar of Dutch Gee, Introduction to Discourse Analysis Humboldt, On Language Kager, Optimal@ Theory Nuiiez and Morales-Front, Fonologia generativa contempordnea de la lengua espafiola Ouhalla, Introducing Transformational Grammar Peccei, Child Language Peccei, Pragmatics Sag and Wasow, Syntactic Theory Schiffman, Reference Grammar of Spoken Tamil Smith, Essentials of Early English Trask, Language: The Basics Waters, Local Literacies 4. LANGUAGE INDEX Bangla: Wilce Bantu: Maho Breton: Heinecke Danish: Brandt English: Con&h, Foulkes and Docherty, Gorlach, Giegerich, Hermeren, Rudanko, Smith French: Amiot et al., Comish, Curat, Rossi German: Choi Haya: Seitel Hebrew: Harshav 850 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 Ikalanga: Mathangwane Indo-Aryan: Salomon Italian: Monachesi Kashmiri: Bhatt Korean: Choi, Sohn Lardil: M&night Middle Egyptian: Allen Miskitu: Andrews and Manning Romanian: Amiot et al. Russian: Brown Spanish: Nuiiez and Morales-Front, Cifuentes Honrubia Tamil: Schiffman Tariana: Andrews and Manning Wagiman : Wilson Welsh: Heinecke 5. THE SURVEY James P. ALLEN Middle Egyptian An Introduction to the Language and Culture of Hieroglyphs Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1999 xii + 51Opp. f50.00 (hardback) ISBN 0 521 65312 6 f18.95 $29.95 (paperback) ISBN 0 521 77 483 7 Contents: Preface Map of Egypt l/Egyptian Language and Writing 2/The Sounds of Middle Egyptian 3Multiliteral Signs 4/Nouns S/Pronouns 6/Adjectives 7/Adjectival and Nominal Sentences 8/Prepositions and Adverbs 9/Numbers IO/Adverbial Sentences ll/Nonverbal Sen- tences 12/Nonverbal Clauses 13/Verbs 14/I™he Infinitival Forms lS/The Pseudoverbal Con- struction 16/The Imperative and Particles 17/The Stative lZ?me Perfect 19/rhe Subjunctive 2O/The Perfective and Imperfective 21/The Prospective and Passive 22/0ther Forms of the Suffix Conjugation 23/rhe Participles 24/The Relative Forms ZS/Special Uses of the Relative Forms 26/Middle Egyptian Grammar References Sign List Dictionary Answers to the Exer- cises Index This book provides an introduction to the Ancient Egyptian system of hieroglyphic writing and to the Ancient Egyptian language, known as Middle Egyptian. It is written for non-spe- cialists, but it also provides a complete grammatical description of the classical language of Ancient Egypt. Dany AMIOT / Walter De MULDER / Nelly FLAUX / Maria TENCHEA (eds.) Fonctions syntaxiques et r8les semantiques (Cahiers scientifiques de 1™Universite d™Artois 13) Artois: Artois Presses Universite, 1999 216~~. FF80.00 ISBN 2-910663-41-8 ISSN 1275-3114 Contents: l/Introduction (Dany Amiot, Walter De Mulder, Nelly Flaux and Maria Tenchea) 2IPrendre Marie par la main I le couteau par le manche ou comment par joue la partie? (Anne-Marie Berthonneau) 3/En et duns. Syntaxe, interpretation, reference (Ligia-Stela Flo- Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 851 rea) 4/Les syntagmes du roumain construits avec la preposition intru. Syntaxe et semantique (Maria Tenchea) 5/La preposition roumaine peste au carrefour des theories linguistiques (Alexandra Cunita) 6/Accusatif ou datif. Etude comparee francais-roumain des quelques verbes qui hesitent (Marleen Van Peteghem) 7/Les verbes de pen&e en fiancais et en roumain. Structures syntaxiques et interpretations semantiques (Eugenia Arjoca Ieremia) 8/Recession actancielle et contrastivite (Teodora C&tea) 9/Les complements de l™adjectif en ci + infinitifet leurs equivalents roumains (Adina Tihu) lO/Sructure syntaxique des noms de lieux (Ilie Minescu) ll/lhematisation et dislocation gauche en roumain et en francais (Corina Cilianu-Lascu) 12/Fonctions syntaxiques et/au fonctions discursives (Liana Pop) 13/La fonc- tion de cccomplement du nom>> dans les groupes binominaux en de et les roles semantiques (Nelly Flaux) 14/Adjectifs d™ttats, adjectifs de qualites (Daniele Van De Velde) lS/Les verbes doublement transitifs: contraintes syntaxiques et semantiques (Bernard Bouillon) 16/De la transitivite des verbes prefixes par pr& (Dany Amiot) 17/Les excuses sont-elles faites pour s™en servir? Roles semantiques et actes de langage (Walter De Mulder and Tine Van Hecke) 18/L™Ctude de la subordination infinitive dans les grammaires de reference (Guy Legrand) The papers in this volume focus on two related languages, that differ in many ways: French and Romanian. The main theme is the relationship between syntactic function and semantic role. Avery D. ANDREWS / Christopher D. MANNING Complex Predicates and Information Spreading in LFG (Stanford Monographs in Linguistics) Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications, 1999 ix + 153~~. g35.00 $49.95 (hardback) ISBN 1 575 86165 8 f11.95 $18.95 (paperback) ISBN 1 575 86164 X Contents: Preface l/Introduction 2/Predicate Composition 3iRomance Complex Predicates 4/Serial Verb Constructions 5/Conlusions and Prospects A Glue Language Semantics B Pre- vious Proposals Bibliography Index This book provides a framework for describing complex predicates and related construc- tions, and applies it to the analysis of complex predicates in Romance, and certain serial verb constructions in Tariana and Miskitu. The authors argue for replacing the projection architec- ture of LFG with a notion of differential information spreading within a unified feature struc- ture. Peter AUER (ed.) Code-Switching in Conversation Language, Interaction and Identity London: Routledge, 1999 viii + 355~~. E19.99 ISBN o-415-21609-5 (paperback) ISBN O-415-15831-1 (hardback) Contents: List of Contributors Acknowledgements l/Introduction: Bilingual Conversa- tion revisited (Peter Auer) I The ‚codes™ of code-switching 2/From ‚switching code™ to ‚code-switching™: Towards a reconceptualisation of communicative codes (Celso Alvarez- Caccamo) 3/Cede-switching and the notion of code in linguistics: Proposals for a dual focus model (Rita Franceschini) 4/A monolectal view of code-switching: Layered code-switching among Zairians in Belgium (Michael Meeuwis and Jan Blommaert) S/Discourse connectives in bilingual conversation: The case of an emerging Italian-French mixed code (Cecilia Oesch Serra) 6/0n the transition from code-switching to a mixed code (Yael Maschler) II Conver- 852 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 sation and beyond 7fI™he ‚why™ and ‚how™ questions in the analysis of conversational code- switching (Li Wei) 8/The conversational dimension in code-switching between Italian and dialect in Sicily (Giovanna Alfonzetti) 9/Bilingual conversation strategies in Gibraltar (Melisa G. Moyer) lO/Children™s acquisition of code-switching for power wielding (J.N. Jor- gensen ll/We, they and identity: Sequential versus identity-related explanation in code- switching (Mark Sebba and Tony Wootton) 12JLanguage crossing and the redefinition of reality (Ben Rampton) 13/Perspectives on cultural variability of discourse and some implica- tions for code-switching (Christopher Stroud) Index This volume brings together contributions from a variety of sociolinguistic settings in which the phenomenon of code-switching is observed. It addresses not only the structure and the function, but also the ideological values of such bilingual behaviour. Serge y AVRUTIN Development of the Syntax-Discourse Interface (Studies in Theoretical Psycholinguistics 23) Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1999 xii + 213~~. NLG180.00 $96.00 E59.00 ISBN O-7923-5936-4 Contents: Acknowledgements Introduction l/Establishing Reference 2/Syntax, Discourse and Interpretation of Pronominals 3/Anomalous Indexation 4/Experimental Evidence for the Proposed Model S/Possessive Pronouns and Reflexives in Russian Q/Plural Pronouns 7/Chil- dren™s Interpretation of the Discourse-dependent Reflexives S/Discoure-Based Analyses of Root Infinitives 9/Summary and Concluding Remarks Notes References Index The main focus of the book is development of referential abilities in young children. A number of findings suggest that errors exhibited by young children result from the inability to implement discourse-related knowledge. It is argued that this deficiency is due to the lack of language specific processing resources. In order to support this claim, certain similarities between the language of children and Broca™s aphasics are discussed. Martin J. BALL / Joan RAHILLY Phonetics The Science of Speech London: Arnold, 1999 vii + 239~~. E35.00 (hardback) ISBN 0340700092 f14.99 (paperback) ISBN 0340700106 Contents: Introduction l/The anatomy and physiology of speech 2/initiation of speech 3/Speech articulation 4/Segments of speech: obstruent consonants S/Segments of speech: sonorant consonants and vowels 6/Suprasegments of speech 7/Multiple articulations, co- articulation and the parameters of speech 8/Principles and methods of phonetic transcription 9/Acoustic characteristics of speech lOme perception of speech ll/Perceptual phonetics 12/instrumental phonetics Appendix l-2 References Index The authors offer a detailed explanation of the process of speech production, from the anatomical initiation of sounds to the final articulation of vowels and consonants. The book also provides advice on transcription. It describes how speech waves can be measured and decoded by listeners, discussing both physiological and neurological aspects of hearing. Michael BAMBERG / Allyssa MCCABE (eds.) Narrative Inquiry Volume 9. Issue 1, 1999 Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1999 214~~. NLG310.00 / NLG98.00 $49.00 (individual) ISSN 1387-6740 Survey of books I Lingua Ill (2001) 841-894 853 Contents: Articles lnelling Tales: A Complicated Narrative about Courtship (Greer Caval- laro Johnson) 2/Ihe Function of Self-Aggrandizement in Storytelling (Miguel Oliveira) 3/ﬁ1 Hear From People Who Read Torah . . . ﬂ : Reported Speech, Genres and Gender Relations in Personal Narrative (Esther Schely-Newman) 4/Life Story Coherence and its Relation to Psy- chological Well-Being (Dana Royce Baerger and Dan P. McAdams) S/Remembering as Social Practice: Identity And Life Story Work in Transitions of Care for People with Pro- found Learning Disabilities (David Middleton and Helen L. Hewitt) 6/Adult Children of Parents with Learning Difficulties: Stereotypical Outcomes and the Reporting of Narrative Research (Tim Booth) 7/The Transformation of Narrative Syntax into Institutional Memory (Charlotte Linde) Commentaries S/(Re)discovering Culture: The Narrative Production of Social Memory (Geoffrey White) 9/institutional Narrative: Culture, Professionalization and Depersonalization (B&t-Louise Gunnarsson) lO/Ihoughts on Institutional Memory: Narra- tive Constructions and Future Time (Gelya Frank) 11/A Memory of Many Mondays (Jenny Cook-Gumperz) Research Notes 12/What Do Children Tell in Their Own Stories: Opening up Children™s Narrative Culture (Niina Rutanen) 13/Ail Quiet on the Western Front and Understanding of Psychological Trauma (Nigel Hunt) Publication announcement Zhiming BAO The Structure of Tone Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 xi + 252~~. E40.00 ISBN 0 19 5118804 Contents: l/Introduction 2fI™heories of Tone: A Survey 3/The Representation of Tone 4/I™he Autosegmental Nature of Tone S/Tone in Phonological Representation 6fIhe Mid Tone 7JEpilogue Notes Appendix References Index The book addresses two issues that are at the center of research in nonlinear phonology. First of all, it deals with the internal structure of phonological elements, such as segments and tone. Secondly, the overall structure of phonological representation is discussed. The book also addresses the relationship between tone and other autosegments, particularly syllable structure. Femand BENTOLILA (ed.) Systemes verhaux (Bibliotheque des Cahiers de 1™Institut de Linguistique de Louvain 98) Louvain-La-Neuve: Peeters, 1998 334~~. FB1560.00 ISBN 90-429-0708-8 (Peeters Leuven) ISBN 2-87723-413-4 (Peeters France) Contents: Introduction a l™etude des sytemes verbaux (Femand Bentolila) l/Les modal&% verbales en montagnais (Pierre Martin) 2/Le systeme verbal du phurhepecha (Claudine Chamoreau) 3/Le systeme verbal portugais (Jorge Morais Barbosa) 4/I_..e systeme verbal du grec (Christos Clairis) S/Le systeme verbal de Konkani (J.M. Gurere et M.L. Sardessai) 6/Le systeme verbal du hindi (Neeta Jam Duhaut) 7/Le systeme verbal creole reunionnais (Gillette Staudacher-Valliamee) S/Le systeme verbal de l™arabe litteral modeme (Abdelhamid Ibn El Farouk) 9/Le systbme verbal de l™amharique (Femand Bentolila and Shimelis Frew) lO/Le systeme verbal du kasim: Un dispositif de prise en charge du pro&s (Ernilio Bonvini) ll/Le systeme verbal de l™btetela (Michel Wetshemongo Kamomba) 12/Le systeme ‚verbal™ de la variete merina de malgache (Jean-Michel Builles) 13/Premiere approche du systeme verbal de l™ingouche (Francoise GuCrin) 14-1/I-e systbme verbal du coreen (Choi Jaeho) 14-2/Re- marques de Lee Dong-won 14-3/RCponse de Choi Jaeho lS/Le systeme ‚verbal™ du wallisien (Nguyen Ba Duong) Index des notions Table des mat&es 854 Survey of books I Lingua 1 I1 (2001) 841-894 The descriptions of the verbal system of several languages discussed in this book are all founded on the same theoretical principles. In this way, these descriptions can be used by both typological and comparative research. The contributions do not provide a detailed description of the language, but focus on its verbal system. Brent BERLIN / Paul KAY Basic Color Terms Their Universality and Evolution (The David Hume Series, Philosophy and cognitive science reissues, CSLI Publications) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 xiii + 196~~. g14.95 $22.95 ISBN 1 575 86162 3 Contents: Preface to the paperback edition Preface Introduction l/The data, hypothesis, and general findings 2/Evolution of basic color terms 3/The data 4/Summary of results and some speculations Appendix I-IV Notes References cited Bibliography of color categorization research 1970-1990 by Luisa Maffi Index Tables Figures The main findings of the study presented in this monograph are (1) there are substantive universal constraints on the shape of basic color lexicons; and (2) basic color lexicons change over time by adding basic color terms in a highly constrained, though not mechanically pre- dictable, manner. Roland BERNECKER / Joachim UMLAUF (eds.) Die ijbersetzung in der Unterrichtspraxis Akten eines DAAD-Fachseminars in Names Miinster : Nodus, 1999 102~~. ISBN 3-89323-277-X Contents: Vorwort l/Vom Ausgangstext zum Zieltext oder: Dokumentarisches vs. Instru- mentelles Ubersetzen (S&rid Kupsch-Losereit) t/Praktische Ubersetzungsreflexion. iiber- legungen zur Umsetzung des fmrktionalen Ansatzes im universitaren Fremdsprachenunter- richt (Matthias Jung) S/Gef&rliche Verfiihrungen, verfiihrerische Gefahren. Ein iibersetzungsvergleich im Horizont der Unterrichtspraxis (Kerstin Gemig) 4/Das rhPme d™Agr6ggation: Beurteilungsmuster und Ubersetzungsstrategien (Gunhild Samson) S/ijberset- zen im Grundstudium bei Germanisten und Nicht-Germanisten. Ein Erfahrungsbericht (Ste- fame Ceelen) 6/‚Traduction simultanee™ im Studiengang L.E.A. der Universitat Names - Erfahrungen und Anregungen (Charlotte Koch) 7/Nachwort - Ccriture et traduction - (Nicole Bary) Index nominum This volume results from several presentations given at the DAAD (Deutscher Akademis- cher Austauschdienst) in Names, March 1997. The theme is the problem of translation. This volume concentrates on new methods and ways of education. Rakesh Mohan BHATT Verb Movement and the Syntax of Kashmiri (Studies in Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 46) Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1999 xiv + 291~~. NLG220.00 $117.00 573.00 ISBN 0792360338 Contents: Acknowledgments List of abbreviations l/Introduction 2/Ihe Kashmiri Language 3/Configurationality and Phrase Structure 4/Verb-Second (V2) Phenomena 5Motivating Verb Movement 6/Subject Position, Object Positions, and Case 7/Epilogue References Lan- guage Index Name Index Subject Index Survey of books I Lingua 11 I (2001) 841-894 855 This book investigates the phenomenon of verb-second in a language outside the Ger- manic family, Kashmiri. Kashmiri is unique in that it exhibits both the German/Dutch and the Yiddish/Icelandic type of verb movement. The book provides new comparative data and a discussion of the crucial syntactic processes of Kashmiri. Valentina BIANCHI Consequences of Antisymmetry Headed Relative Clauses (Studies in Generative Grammar 46) Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1999 xiii + 357~~. DM178.00 ISBN 3-l l-016250-4 Contents: l/The theoretical background: Kayne™s (1994) ‚Antisymmetry of Syntax™ 2/Restrictive relative clauses 3/The syntax of relative determiners 4/A reconstruction asym- metry 5/Appositive relative clauses 6/Doubly filled Comp effects 7me complementizer sys- tem of headed relative clauses 8/Stacking, coordination, and extraposition 9/Concluding remarks Notes References Index The aim of this book is to discuss the consequences of Antisymmetry in the domain of postnominal headed relative clauses. It provides evidence in support of the raising analysis of these constructions by working out various aspects that are left implicit or unexplored in Kayne™s discussion. Besides this, the book aims at showing that the raising analysis is empir- ically superior to the adjunction analysis on several grounds. Andreas BLANK / Peter KOCH (eds.) Historical Semantics and Cognition (Cognitive Linguistics Research 13) Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1999 viii + 312~~. DM198.00 ISBN 3 11 016614 3 Contents: l/Introduction: Historical semantics and cognition (Andreas Blank and Peter Koch) I Theories and models 2/Cognitive semantics and structural semantics (John R. Tay- lor) 3/Diachronic semantics: Towards a unified theory of language change? (Helmut Ludtke) 4/Why do new meanings occur? A cognitive typology of the motivations for lexical seman- tic change (Andreas Blank) S/Diachronic prototype semantics. A digest (Dirk Geeraerts) 6/Cognitive semantics and diachronic semantics: The values and evolution of classes (Francois Rastier) II Descriptive categories 7/Losing control: Grammaticization, subjectifi- cation, and transparency (Ronald W. Langacker) ?3/‚lhe rhetoric of counter-expectation in semantic change: A study in subjectification (Elizabeth Closs Traugott) 9/Synecdoche as a cognitive and communicative strategy (Brigitte Nerlich and David D. Clarke) lo/Laws of thought, knowledge and lexical change (Beatrice Warren) III Case studies ll/Intensifiers as targets and sources of semantic change (Ekkehard Konig and Peter Siemund) 12/Cognitive ease and lexical borrowing: The recategorization of body parts in Romance (Thomas Krefeld) 13/Cognitive aspects of semantic change and polysemy: The semantic space HAVE/BE (Peter Koch) List of contributors Index The papers collected in this volume evolved from a symposium that was held September 19-21, 1996 in Berlin. The symposium was organized with the double intention of providing a forum in which synchronically and diachronically oriented scholars would have to exchange their ideas and where American and European cognitive linguists would be confronted with representatives of different directions in European structural semantics. 856 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 Carlo BO (ed.) Lingua e Letteratura 1998 30-31 M&no: IULM, 1998 175pp. Contents: l/In memoria di Alessandro Migliazza (Carlo Bo) 2/La <<Bellezza mortale>> de1 corpo e la poesia religiosa di Gerard Manley Hopkins (John Meddemmen) 3/B dramma de1 desiderio SulomP di Wilde e Strauss (Massimo Bacigalupo) 4/La scrittnra come confessione nel primo romanzo di camillo JosC Cela (R&d Crisafio) S/Vladimir Nabokov: La difesa di luiin il suicidio di un uomo di talent0 (Stefania Pavan) 6/La lenteur o la fine de1 personaggio de1 libertino (Vanessa Kamkhagi) 7ICasi clinici e tecniche narrative: La sessualiti in The white hotel di D.M. Thomas (Paola Carbone) g/La controversiu owero il sogno di una scena illu- minista (Paolo Puppa) 9/Chagall e Bulgakov sogno e magia nell™opera di due grandi visionari russi (Milli Martinelli) lO/Musil, poeta della crvita interiormente fluttuante, (Ralph Szukala) ll/Riflessioni sull™androgino (Francine Loreau) 12/Awentnre letterarie di un lettore dilettante (Sergio Pautasso) 13/Spigolature in margine alla ricerca Italiana dell™opera di Michail M. Bachtin (Massimo Bonafin) 14/Honork de Balzac, L.a commediu umunu (Daniela De Agostini) lS/Schizzi linguistici II (Mario Negri) 16/La produttivit& di unita formative nella linguistica della variazione: 11 case di diluliu (Raffaella Bombi) 17/Umlaut e allgemeine lautgesetze: una nota (Francesca Santulli) 18/Dialogo sulla poesia, di Edoardo Zuccato (Thomas0 Kemeny e Fulvio Papi) 19/Saggi Italiani su Barbara pym, di E.Z. (Patrizia Nerozzi e Graziella Corso) Robert BORSLEY Syntactic Theory A Unified Approach Second edition London: Arnold, 1999 xii + 276~~. f16.99 ISBN 0 340 70610 4 Contents: Preface to the second edition Preface to the fist edition l/Preliminaries 2/Can- stituent structure 3/Syntactic rules 4/Syntactic categories S/Heads and complements 6/Sub- jects and predicates 7/Anaphora 8/Noncanonical complements and subjects 9/Grammatical functions lo/Passives ll/Raising sentences 12lControl 13/Wh-dependencies 14/island con- straints 15/Concluding remarks Glossary Bibliography Index This book introduces the ideas which underlie most approaches to syntax and shows how they have been developed within two broad frameworks: Principles and Parameters Theory and Phrase Structure Grammar. It highlights the similarities as well as the differences of these two frameworks. S@ren BRANDT Modal Verbs in Danish (Travaux du Cercle Linguistique de Copenhague vol. XXX) Copenhagen: Reitzel, 1999 206~~. Kr275.00 ISBN 87-7876-120-4 Contents: Summary l/Introduction 2/Dimensions of Modality 3/Danish Modals and Their Variants 4/Basic Modal Grammar S/Syntactic Modal Constructions 6/Concepts of Modality Literature Literature Survey Danish Modal Literature Other References In this book a description of the basic sense variants of the Danish modals is given. It also discusses the interactions between modality and other grammatical categories like negation, tense. and voice. Survey of books I Lingua 1 I I (2001) 841-894 857 William BRIGHT (ed.) Written Language and Literacy Volume 2, number 1, 1999 Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1999 165~~. Hf1190.00 Hf196.00 $48.00 individual ISSN 1387-6732 Contents: Articles l/Strategies for Representing Tone in African Writing Systems (Steven Bird) 2/A Matter of Typology: Alphasyllabaries and Abugidas (William Bright) 3/Same Semitic Phonological Considerations on the Sibilants of the Greek Alphabet (Peter T. Daniels) 4/Register Aspects of Literacy in Spanish (John Gibbons) S/Myths of Illiter- acy: Childhood Memories of Reading in London™s East End (Eve Gregory) 6/Literacy and Children™s Conception of Words (Bruce Homer and David Olson) 7/Commentary: An Orthography on Trial in Belarus (Jan Maksymiuk) Book Reviews 8/Roger D. Woodard, Greek writing from Knossos to Homer: A linguistic interpretation of the origin of the Greek alphabet and the continuity of Ancient Greek literacy (Leslie Threate) 9/Steven Roger Fischer, Rongorongo: The Easter Island script: History, traditions, text (Martha J. Macri) lo/Robert Bringhurst, The element of typographic style (Charles Bigelow) Brief Notices Cecil H. BROWN Lexical Acculturation in Native American Languages (Oxford Studies in Anthropological Linguistics 20) Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 259~~. 544.50 ISBN 0 19 5121619 Contents: l/Introduction 2/Methodology 3/Nomenclature 4/Lexical Univerals 5/Lexical Bor- rowability 6/Regional Patterns and Bilingualism 7/Lexical Replacement 8/Native Term Dif- fusion 9/European Loan Diffusion lo/Loan Shift: A Brief Case Study ll/Postcontact Linguistic Areas 12/Conclusion Appendix A-B References Index of Languages, Items of Acculturation, Personal and Geographical Names Subject Index Lexical acculturation refers to the accommodation of languages to new objects and con- cepts encountered as a result of culture contact. The focus of this book is on linguistic aspects of the Columbian exchange that involved transfers of European objects to the New World. This entails a survey of Amerindian names for 77 objects and concepts introduced by the Europeans to the Americas. Sue BROWN The Syntax of Negation in Russian: A Minimalist Approach (Stanford Monographs in Linguistics) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 xii +154pp. g35.00 $49.95 (hardback) ISBN 1 575 86169 0 f11.95 $18.95 (paperback) ISBN 1 575 86168 2 Contents: Preface l/Negation Phenomena in Russian 2/The Minimalist Program 3/Negative Constituents in Russian 4/lhe Genitive of Negation S/Expletive ne and the Asymmetry of Russian Negation 6/Expressing Negation References Index This book offers a Minimalist analysis of certain syntactic phenomena in Russian associ- ated with negation. The end result is a formalization of the status of negation within the phrase structure of Russian that not only contributes relevant Slavic data to the pool of ne- gation data, but also sheds new light on the syntactic expression of negation universally. 858 Survey of books I Lingua III (2001) 841-894 Miriam BUTT / Tracy HOLLOWAY KING / Maria-Eugenia NINO / Frederique SECOND A Grammar Writer™s Cookbook (CSLI Lecture Notes Number 95) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 xii +244pp. g40.00 $59.95 (hardback) ISBN 1 575 86171 2 514.95 $22.95 (paperback) ISBN 1 575 86170 4 Contents: Abbreviations l/Introduction I The Grammars: General Analyses Z/I™be Clause 3/Verbal Elements 4/Nominal Elements S/Determiners and Adjectives 6/Prepositional Phrases 7/Adverbial Elements 8/Coordination 9/Special Constructions II Grammar En- gineering lo/Overview ll/Architecture and User Interface 12/Finite-State Technology 13/Modularity, Maintainability and Transparency 14/Performance A Appendix: Feature Stan- dardization References Subject Index Name Index This book is an introduction into the writing and design of computational grammars, reporting on experiences and analyses within the ParGram parallel grammar development project. Using the LFG framework, this project implemented grammars for German, French and English. The book also includes a discussion of the standard range of constructions that need to be implemented in a wide-coverage grammar. Pierre-Francois CAILLE (ed.) Babel International Journal of Translation Volume 44, no. 4, 1998 Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1998 96pp. Hfl170.00 Hf1112.00 $56.00 individual ISSN 0521-9744 Contents: Articles l/Translating Bei Dao: Translatability as Reading and Critique (Dian Li) 2/Modifications, expansion et reduction dans la traduction des verbes de parole en francais et en arabe (Ahmed Gasmi) 3/A Prophecy for the Jews: Isaiah in Yiddish and Ger- man (Albert Waldinger) 4/Death of the Translator and Birth of the Interpreter (Yong Zhong) 5/Ihe Life of FIT Fit member societies Associate member societies 6/UNESCO Collection of representative works Ibrahim Muhawi, Sharif Kanaana: 11 Ctait plusieurs fois . . . Contes populaires palestiniens (Ahmed Gasmi) Bibliographical and Lexicographical Information Pierre-Francois CAILLE (ed.) Babel International Journal of Translation Volume 45, no. 1, 1999 Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1999 96pp. Hf1185.00 Hfll12.00 $56.00 individual ISSN 0521-9744 Contents: Articles l/Aspects of Ideology in Translating Literature (Adnan K. Abdulla) 2/La Ampliacidn de1 Discurso Traslativo a Proposito de 10s Nombres Propios (Virgilio Moya) 3/Publicite, traduction et reproduction de la culture (Quillard Genevieve) 4/Social deixis in the translation of dramatic discourse (David Horton) The World of Translation 5/The Life of FIT Publications de la FIT 6/UNESCO Collection of representative works Hugo Claus: The Swordfish (Theo Hermans) Bibliographical and Lexicographical Infor- mation Andrew CARSTAIRS-MCCARTHY The Origins of Complex Language An Inquiry into the Evolutionary Beginnings of Sentences, Syllables, and Truth Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 859 (Oxford Linguistics) Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 ix + 272~~. f45.00 (hardback) ISBN O-19-823822-3 f14.99 (paperback) ISBN O-19-823821-5 Contents: List of Figures and Tables Abbreviations l/Introduction 2/The Peculiarities of Language 3/Truth and Reference 4/Attempts to Solve the Problems 5/A Different Solution 6/Apes, Anthropology, and the Brain 7/Just How Unique Are We? Appendix: Sentences, Statements, and Propositions References Further Reading Name Index Subject Index This book offers a theory of the origins of human language ability and presents an account of the early evolution of language. The author draws on evidence from archaeology, linguis- tics, brain neurology, primate communication and evolutionary biology. Jean-Claude CHEVALIER / Maurice GROSS / Christian LECLERE (eds.) Lingvisticae Investigationes International Journal of French Linguistics and General Linguistics Tome XXI (1997) Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1997 2633446~~. NLG348.00 / 99.00 (individual) ISSN 0378-4169 Contents: Articles l/lexique-Grammaire des adjectifs syme™triques (Nam Jee-Sun) 2/Neutral Verbs in English: A Preliminary Classification (Peter A. Machonis) 3/Noms composes et tra- duction fran9ais-espagnol (Xavier Blanco) 4/Synthesis of Results about Analysis of Corpora in Hungarian (Julia Pajzs) S/Pour un dictionnaire des frequences des locutions verbales (Har- ald Ulland) 6/A Computer Corpus-Based Study of Subject Raising in Modem Portuguese (Mark Davies) 7/Lexical Resources and Tools for Tagging Polish Texts within GRAMLEX (Zygmunt Vetulani et al.) Reviews 8/Content, expression and structure. Studies in Danish functional grammar, Kurt Braunmtiller (Elisabeth Engberg-Pedersen et al.) 9/De la construc- tion (syntaxe), Catherine Fuchs (Apollonius Dyscole) lO/L.es adverbes du frangais: Le cas des adverbes en -ment, Pierre LarrivCe (Claude Guimier) Notices bibliographiques These Ouvrages Recus Hye-Won CHOI Optimizing Structure in Context Scrambling and Information Structure (Dissertations in Linguistics) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 viii + 223~~. f40.00 $59.95 (hardback) ISBN 1 575 86157 7 f14.95 $22.95 (paperback) ISBN 1 575 86156 9 Contents: Acknowledgments l/Introduction 2/Phrase Structure and Configurationality 3/Specificity, Focus, and Information Structure 4/0ptimization in German Scrambling 5/Opti- mization in Korean Scrambling 6/Conclusion Bibliography Index This volume examines the scrambling phenomena in German and Korean from the per- spective that different ordering possibilities are motivated and constrained by interactions among syntactic, semantic, and discourse principles. Using Optimality Theory, the author demonstrates how these principles from different modules of grammar interact. This inter- modular approach explains various meaning-related effects associated with scrambling such as definiteness effects and focus effects. Lilie CHOULIARAKI / Norman FAIRCLOUGH Discourse in Late Modernity Rethinking Critical Discourse Analysis 860 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 (Critical Discourse Analysis Series) Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1999 viii + 168~~. gl5.95 ISBN 0 7486 1082 0 Contents: Acknowledgements Series Preface l/Discourse iu late modernity 2/Social life and critical social science 3/Discourse 4/Ihe critical analysis of discourse S/Narratives of late modernity and a research agenda for CDA 6/Language, space and time 7/Discourse, differ- ence and the openness of the social 8/Critical discourse analysis and linguistics Bibliography Index Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) is the analysis of discourse in its relation to social change and relations of power in modem society. This volume sets out a theoretical grounding for CDA. It situates CDA as a form of critical social research in relation to diverse theories. Frances CHRISTIE (ed.) Pedagogy and the Shaping of Consciousness Linguistic and social processes (Open Linguistics Series) London: Cassell, 1999 296~~. 05.00 ISBN 0 304 70228 5 Contents: Contributors Introduction (Frances Christie) l/Society, language and the mind: the meta-dialogism of Basil Bernstein™s theory (Ruqaiya Hasan) 2/Context for learning (Cannel Cloran) 3/Preparing for school: Developing a semantic style for educational knowledge (Clare Painter) 4/The pedagogic device and the production of pedagogic discourse: A case example in early literacy education (Geoff Williams) S/Mentoring semogenesis: ‚Geme- bases™ literacy pedagogy (J.R. Martin) 6/The pedagogic device and the teaching of English (Frances Christie) 7/Language, knowledge and authority in school mathematics (Robert Veel) 8/Culture, competence and schooling: Approaches to literacy teaching in indigenous school education (David Rose) 9/Gfficial knowledge and pedagogic identities (Basil Bernstein) lo/Pedagogic identities and educational reform in the 1990s: The cultural dynamics of national curricula (William Tyler) Index This volume includes papers that draw both on systemic functional linguistic theory (with special reference to genre) and Bernstein™s sociological theory, that language plays a signifi- cant role in the construction and social experience and social inequality. Jose Luis CIFUENTES HONRUBIA Sintaxis y semantica de1 movimiento Aspectos de gramatica cognitiva Instituto de cultura <<Juan Gil-Albert,,, 1999 253~~. ISBN 84-7784-331-7 Contents: Preliminares l/Inacusatividad, ergatividad y movimiento 2/Sem&ntica y cogni- cion de1 movimiento 3/Amalgamas verbales 4/Conclusiones y apendices S/Referencias bibliograficas This study explores the relations between syntax and semantics of movement constructions in Spanish. Guglielmo CINQUE Adverbs and Functional Heads A Cross-Linguistic Perspective (Oxford Studies in Comparative Syntax) Survey of books I Lingua I I1 (2001) 841-894 861 Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 xii + 275~~. f50.00 (hardback) ISBN 0 19 5 115260 g29.50 (paperback) ISBN 0 19 5 115279 Contents: Abbreviations l/On the Relative Order of Adverb Phrases 2/A Case for Adverb Phrases in Spec 3/0n the Order of Clausal Functional Heads 4/Matching and Refining the Hierarchies of Adverb Phrases and Functional Heads S/DP-Related Functional Projections and Negative Phrases 6/Same Implications and Residual Questions 7/Conclusions Appendix l-2 Notes References Language Index Name Index Subject Index The author presents evidence for locating adverb phrases in the specifiers of distinct func- tional projections. This new theory of the clause rests on three main observations: the rigid order of adverb phrases, the rigid order of the head morphemes that encode the different types of functional notions of the clause and the fact that adverb clauses and functional heads match systematically left to right. The transparent semantic relation holding between each adverb class and the contiguous head morpheme to its right is taken to suggest that the adverb phrase is the specifier of the (functional) phrase projected by the corresponding functional head mor- pheme. Ariel COHEN Think Generic! The Meaning and Use of Generic Sentences (Dissertations in Linguistics) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000 xiii + 208~~. f37.50 $59.95 (hardback) ISBN 1 575 86207 7 f13.95 $22.95 (paperback) ISBN 1 575 86208 5 Contents: Preface l/Introduction and Overview 2/JYwo Views of Generics 3/Alternative- Based Generics 4/Generics as Probability Judgments S/Determining the Alternatives 6/Gen- erics and Frequency Adverbs 7/Reasoning with Generics 8/Conclusion References This book provides answers to central problems concerning generics: what do they mean? Which factors affect their interpretation? How can one reason with generics? The author pro- poses that the meanings of generics are probability judgments, and shows how this view accounts for many of their puzzling properties. Annabel CORMACK Definitions Implications for Syntax, Semantics, and the Language of Thought (Outstanding Dissertations in Linguistics, a Garland Series) London: Garland, 1998 xi + 362~~. E39.95 ISBN O-8153-3131-2 Contents: Preface Acknowledgments l/Theoretical Preliminaries 2/Dictionary Definitions 3/Text Definitions 4/Syntax: Conclusions, Problems, and Speculations 5/The Language of Thought: Findings, Problems, and Speculations Bibliography Index The focus of this book is on definitions in linguistics, which were culled both from dic- tionaries and text books. The author considers on the one hand, the syntax and semantics of the definition itself, and on the other, how the information conveyed by the definition can be put to use in constructing an item in the mental lexicon. Francis CORNISH Anaphora, Discourse, and Understanding Evidence from English and French 862 Survey of books I Lingua I I I (2001) 841-894 (Oxford Linguistics) Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 xvi + 277 pp. 555.00 (hardback) ISBN 0 19 8236484 g19.95 (paperback) ISBN 0 19 8700288 Contents: Preface Symbols and abbreviations l/Introduction 2/Anaphora and discourse 3/Semantic_pragmatic determinants of anaphoric value: the role of the indexical segment 4iExophora, saliency, and discourse memory S/Reference within a discourse model: The mental representation of ‚antecedents™ and discourse referents 6/The user™s perspective: The on-line processing of discourse anaphors 7/Conclusion References Subject index The author considers anaphoric reference in discourse from both psychological and lin- guistic perspectives. He argues that anaphora and deixis are essentially integrative discourse procedures that facilitate the linking of representations held in working memory. Peter W. CULICOVER Syntactic Nuts Hard Cases, Syntactic Theory, and Language Acquisition Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 xi + 244~~. 545.00 (hardback) ISBN 0 19 870024 5 g16.95 (paperback) ISBN 0 19 870023 7 Contents: l/Explanation 2JCategories 3JConstructions 4/Constraints References Index This book investigates the architecture of the language faculty by considering what the properties of language reveal about the mental abilities and processes involved in language acquisition. In considering why the language faculty deals as easily and as precisely with idiosyncratic cases as it does with general cases, the author argues the trend in generative linguistics. He suggests that the learning mechanism seeks to form generalizations based on all and only the evidence presented to it. HervC CURAT Les d&erminants dans la rCf6rence nominale et les conditions de leur absence Essai de sCmantique grammaticale II (Langue et Cultures 32) Genkve: Librairie Droz, 1999 350~~. ISBN 2-600-00340-l ISSN 0085-2678 Contents: Sommaire Table des symboles et abrkviations utilisCs Avant-propos l/Prelimi- naires thCoriques et m&hodologiques 2/Les dkterminants sont des pronoms 3JAccord et coor- dination dans le SN 4/La t&e du syntagme nominal 5/La rkfkrence du syntagme nominal 6/Du gCnCrique B l™espece 7/Des massifs au nom d™espkce 8/Les dkterminants d&‚inis 9/Les dCter- minants quantificateurs 10/h cas d™absence de dkterminant 11/h contact du mot et de la chose 12/L™absence de rkfkrence 13/Les SN monor6f&entiels 14/Le nom propre lS/Le jeu de la p&position 16/L,a juxtaposition corhf&entielle 17/Juxtaposition, coordination, apposition 18/Conclusion: RCf&ence spatiale et temporelle Bibliographie des travaux cit& Bibliogra- phie des exemples cites This book is the second of two books dealing with semantics in modem French. The first one Morphologic verbale et rt!f&ence temporelle en fraqais moderne (Droz, 1991) exam- ined nominal reference in modem French, while this one gives an analysis of temporal ref- erence in modem French. The working hypothesis is that the determiner is the head of the nominal constituent. The function of the determiner is the same as that of pronouns, namely to refer. Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 863 Mary DALRYMPLE (ed.) Semantics and Syntax in Lexical Functional Grammar The Resource Logic Approach (Language, Speech, and Communication) London: The MIT Press, 1999 x + 399~~. f27.95 ISBN O-262-04171-5 Contents: Preface Contributors l/Overview and Introduction (Mary Dahymple, John Lamp- ing, Fernando Pereira, and Vijay Saraswat) 2/Quantification, Anaphora, and Intensionality (Mary Dalrymple, John Lamping, Femado Pereira, and Vijay Saraswat) 3/Proof Nets and Negative Polarity Licensing (John Fry) 4/Context Change, Underspecification, and the Struc- ture of Glue Language Derivations (Richard Crouch and Josef van Genabith) S/Resource Sharing in Glue Language Semantics (Andrew Kehler, Mary Dahymple, John Lamping, and Vijay Saraswat) 6/Dynamic and Underspecified Semantics for LFG (Josef van Genabith and Richard Crouch) 7/Relating Resource-based Semantics to Categorial Semantics (Mary Dal- rymple, Vineet Gupta, John Lamping, and Vijay Saraswat) 8/LFG as Concurrent Constraint Programming (Vijay Saraswat) 9/LFG as Labeled Deduction (Dick Oehrle) lO/rype-driven Semantic Interpretation and Feature Dependencies in R-LFG (Mark Johnson) Author Index Subject Index This book offers an introduction into the glue-approach, an approach to the syntax-seman- tics interface that integrates two lines of research: logical deduction for semantic composition and the Lexical Functional Grammar approach to the analysis of linguistic structure. Marcel0 DASCAL (ed.) Pragmatics and Cognition Volume 7, Number 1, 1999 Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1999 iv + 245~~. Hfl280.00 ISSN 0929-0907 Contents: Acknowledgment Articles l/Speech-gesture mismatches: Evidence for one underlying representation of linguistic and nonlinguistic information (Justine Cassell, David McNeil1 and Karl-E& McCullough) 2/Keeping an eye on gestures: Visual perception of ges- tures in face-to-face communication (Marianne Gullberg and Kenneth Holmqvist) 3/Illocu- tions, implicata, and what a conversation requires (Mitchell S. Green) 4/A metacognitive model of conversational planning (Takuo Hayashi) S/Linguistic formulae as cognitive tools (Reviel Netz) 6/Ethotic arguments and fallacies: The credibility function in multi-agent dia- logue systems (Douglas N. Walton) Book Reviews 7/0n the Representational and the Presentational: An Essay on Cognition and the Study of the Mind (Benny Shanon) Reviewed by M. Eunice Quilici Gonzales and Michael B. Wrigley 8/0n Adverbs and Modality in Eng- lish (Leo Hoye) Reviewed by Galia Hatav 9/0n Semantic Ambiguity and Underspecification (Kees van Deemter and Stanley Peters, eds.) Reviewed by Michael Morreau) lo/On The Appeal to Pity: Argumentum ad Misericordiam (Douglas Walton) Reviewed by Alan Gross ll/On Affective Computing (Rosalind W. Picard) Reviewed by Ephraim Nissan 12/0n The Languages of Logic: An Introduction to Formal Logic (Samuel Guttenplan) Reviewed by Nimrod Bar-Am Authors in this Issue Announcement Probal DASGUPTA / Humphrey TONKIN / Marc van OOSTENDORP (eds.) Language Problems and Language Planning Volume 23, number 1, Spring 1999 Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1999 107~~. Hf1195.00 Hf192.00 $46.00 individual ISSN 0272-2690 864 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 Contents: l/Lebanon™s Language-in-Education Policies: From Bilingualism to Trilingualism (Kassim Shaaban and Ghazi Ghaith) Z/Issues in Language Planning and Language Education: A Survey from Macao on Its Return to Chinese Sovereignty (Charles Mann and Gabriella Wong) 3/Language Policy Development for Interpreter Services at the Executive Office for Immigration Review (Nancy Schweda Nicholson) Interlinguistics 4/Kiel evoluas inter- lingvistiko? Komapar studo (Liu Haitao) Reviews S/Lengua escrita y habla culta en AmCrica y Esptia. Diez Casos / Frank Nuessel (Josse De Kock and George Demello) 6/T™he Written Languages of the World: A Survey of the Degree and Modes of Use. Volume 4. China. Book 1. The Written Languages. Book 2. Unwritten Languages / Robert N. St. Clair (Grant D. McConnell and Tan Ke Rang 7/Beitrtige zur Interlinguistik / Klaus Schubert 8/Aspects of Multilingualism in South Africa / Timothy Reagan (Nkonko M. Kamwangamalu, ed.) 9/Bar- ders of Language and Identity in Teschen Silesia / Sydney Schultze (Kevin Hannan) lo/So- ciolinguistics, Language and Society / Timothy Reagan (Mahendra K. Verma, ed.) ll/Esperanto, Interlinguistics, and Planned Languages / Robert N. St. Clair (Humphrey Tonkin, ed.) 12/Hills of Conflict: Basque Nationalism in France / Mary Ellen Scullen (James E. Jacob) 13/Contemporary Perspectives on the Acquisition of Spanish. Volume 1: Develop- ing Grammars. Volume 2: Production, Processing, and Comprehension / Frank Nuessel (Ana Teresa Perez-Leroux and William R. Glass, eds.) 14/Dohnetscher- und iibersetzerausbildung gestem, heute und morgen / Klaus Schubert (Heidemarie Salevsky, ed.) Michel DeGRAFF (ed.) Language Creation and Language Change Creolization, Diachrony, and Development (Learning, Development, and Conceptual Change) Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1999 x + 573~~. g45.50 ISBN o-262-04168-5 Contents: Series Foreword Acknowledgments l/Creolization, Language Change, and Lan- guage Acquisition: A Prolegomenon (Michel DeGraff) I Creolization and Acquisition ~/HOW to Acquire Language without Positive Evidence: What Acquisitionists Can Learn from Creoles (Derek Bickerton) 3/Acquisition of Wh-Questions in Mauritian Creole (Dany Adone and Anne Vainikka) 4/0n the Language Bioprogram Hypothesis: Hints from Tazie (Salikoko S. Mufwene) S/Language Acquisition and Creolization (John S. Lumsden) II Acquisition under (Other) ‚Exceptional™ Circumstances 6/Reduced Input in the Acqui- sition of Signed Languages: Contributions to the Study of Creolization (Elissa L. Newport) 7/Creation through Contact: Sign Language Emergence and Sign Language Change in Nicaragua (Judy Kegl, Ann Senghas, and Marie Coppola) 8/Functional Categories and Par- ameter Setting in the Second-Language Acquisition of Irish in Early Childhood (Alison Henry and Denise Tangney) III Language Procesing and Syntactic Change 9/An Explana- tion for the Decline of Null Pronouns in Certain Germanic and Romance Languages (Rex A. Sprouse and Barbara S. Vance) IV Parameter (Re)setting in Creolization, Language Change, and Language Acquisition lo/Verb Movement and Markedness (Ian Roberts) ll/Double-Object Constructions in the Creole Languages: Development and Acquisition (Adrienne Bruyn, Pieter Muysken, and Maaike Verrips) 12nhe Roots of Negative Concord in French and French-Lexicon Creoles (Viviane DCprez) V Commentaries and Epilogue 13/Creoles and Cues (David Lightfoot) 14/Broadening the Empirical Basis of Universal Grammar Models: A Commentary (Luigi Rizzi) 15/Creolization, Language Change, and Lan- guage Acquisition: An Epilogue (Michel DeGraff) Contributors Index This volume compares various sorts of language growth from a number of linguistic-the- oretic and empirical perspectives, using data from both speech and gesture modalities and Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 865 from a diversity of acquisition environments. This comparison yields new insights on the mental bases of language creation. L. DRAYE Leuvense Bijdragen LB Tijdschrift voor Germaanse Filologie, jaargang 88 (1999) nummer l-2 Leuven: Draye, 1999 265~~. BEFl. 100.00 ISSN 0024-1482 Contents: Artikelen lmittgenstein™s World, A Linguistics Footnote (F.G. Droste) 2/Eggaert en de (nog steeds) onbekende leek (R. Lievens) 3/Tense choice in English past reported speech (G. Jabocs) 4/Semantische Analyse deutscher Substantivkomposita: Drei Untersuchungsmethoden im Vergleich (S. Vandermeeren) 5me meanings of the direct object in a Dutch-speaking child (I. Van Canegem-Ardijns) 6/Akademie und seine Wortverbindungen. Zur Etymologie eines Internationalismus und zur Geschichte seiner Semantik sowie seiner Syntagmen speziell im Deutschen (U. Schrijter) 7nesting Compen- satory Theories of Umlaut (R. Smith) 8/Metonymie en metafoor, metonymische en metaforische betekenisrelaties (0. Leys) Boekbesprekingen 9/Rechtschreibwijrterbiicher im Test , rec. F. Beersmans (G. Augst, V. Bunse, A. HGppner, R. Ruse& S. Schmidt and F.M. Siinkel) lO/Zur Neuregelung der deutschen Orthographie. Begriindung und Kritik, rec. F. Beersmans (G. Augst, K. Bliiml, D. Nerius and H. Sitta, eds.) ll/Die Entwicklung der GroBschreibung im Deutschen von 1500 bis 1700, rec. F. Beersmans (R. Bergmann and D. Nerius) 12/Interkulturelle Wirtschafskommunikation in Europa: Deutschland-Dtiemark. Zur Konzeption eines interkulturellen Kommunikationstrainings fi,ir den deutsch-dtiischen Han- del, rec. L. Sercu (A. Andersen) 13/Contrastief Idioomboek Duits. Handleiding voor doel- matig taalgebruik, rec. W. De Cubber (H. Westheide) 14/Studien zur Phraseologie des Deutschen und des Finnischen, rec. I.T. Piirainen (J. Korhonen) 15/Deutsche Rund- funksprache in mehrsprachiger Umwelt: am Beispiel der Verwendung von Phraseologismen, rec. I.T. Piirainen (C. FGldes and A. H&z) 16/Grammatik und Sprachwirklichkeit von 1640- 1700; zur Rolle deutscher Grammatiker im schriftsprachlichen Ausgleichs-prozess, rec. J. van der Horst (H. Takada) Klaus D. DUTZ / Peter SCHMITI™ER (eds.) Beitrlge zur Geschichte der Sprachwissenschaft 9.1 (1999) Miinster: Nodus, 1999 192~~. ISSN 0939-2815 Contents: Articles l/Robert Baker™s Dependence on Vaugelas (Emma Vorlat) 2/Die Neuar- tigkeit der Grammatik von Hans Glinz. Historische Interpretation auf dem Hintergrund von zwei Haupttypen in der traditionellen Grammatikbeschreibung des Abendlandes. Mit beson- derer Beriicksichtigung der Glinzschen ‚Fiinf-Wortarten-Lehre™ (Hiroyuki Eto) Documenta- tion 3/Germanistik und Sprachtheorie in Aachen 196551979. Versuch einer Bilanz. AbschluBvorlesung, gehalten am 16. Februar 1979 (Hans Glinz) 4/Chronik 1999 (Klaus D. Dutz) Discussion S/Einheit aus der Geschichte? Zur Erforschung der Geschichte der ger- manistischen Sprachwissenschaft (Ulrike Ha&Zumkehr) Reports on Meetings 6/Interprets- tion und Re-Interpretation. Miinster, 12.-13. M&z 1999 (Angelika Riiter) 7/Histoire des sci- ences du langage. Universitgt Potsdam, 30.-31. Oktober 1998 (Georgia Veldre) Reviews 8/. . . qui ante YZOS . - Ein Panorama der Sprachwissenschaftsgeschichte (Riidiger Schmitt) 9/Aristotle™s Influence on Ancient Linguistics. The Position of the Idea of aoriston in Philos- ophy and Linguistics (Dirk M. Schenkeveld) lO/Aux origines de la syntaxe. Le trait6 sur la 866 Survey of books I Lingua 11 I (2001) 841-894 construction d™Apollonius Dyscole (Pierre Swiggers and Alfons Wouters) ll/Sprachauf- kl%rung in einer Fri.ihkonzeption (Klaus D. Dutz) 12/Schriftschicksale - Schicksalsschriften (Herbert E. Brekle) Short Reviews Jeanne FAHNESTOCK Rhetorical Figures in Science Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 xiv + 234~~. u7.00 ISBN 0 19 5117506 Contents: l/The Figures as Epitomes 2/Antithesis 3/Incrementum and Gradatio 4/Antimetabole S/Ploche and Polyptoton Notes References Index This book explores the relationship between the rhetorical and scientific traditions. The author shows that figures of speech play a powerful conceptual role in scientific arguments. These figures expand the understanding of the connections between patterns of language and patterns of reasoning. In this way, they offer possibilities to study cognition through language. Julia S. FALK Women, Language and Linguistics Three American Stories from the First Half of the Twentieth Century (Routledge Studies in the History of Linguistics 2) London: Routledge, 1999 xiv + 306~~. f65.00 ISBN O-415-13315-7 Contents: List of figures Preface Acknowledgments List of abbreviations I Introduction lfhming points 2/Women Foundation Members of the Linguistic Society of America 3/Par- ticipation obstacles and exclusion 4/Three stories II Alice Vanderbilt Morris 5/A Vanderbilt woman 6/Founding of IALA 7/Auxiliary languages: A brief history ?QThe academy 9/IALA™s research programs lo/Alice Vanderbilt Morris and Edward Sapir ll/Conflicts and changes 12/The final product 13/Money and connections 14/Conclusions III Gladys Amnada Reichard lS/Traditions 16/Elsie Clews Parsons: Scientist, benefactor, institution 17/Prepara- tion for the field lS/Language - a living, cultural phenomenon 19/Ihe Hogan School ZO/Nature of language and goals of linguistics 21/Territoriality 22/Relationships 23/Reputation IV E. Adelaide Hahn 24/A life without boundaries 25/Friends and colleagues 26/Adelaide Hahn and the Linguistic Society of America 27/Language and linguistics at Hunter College ZS/Philology and linguistics 29/Vergil, Horace, and Winston Churchill 30/Ancient and classi- cal languages 31/Problems of method 32/Nat forgotten V Epilogue Notes References Index This book focuses on the contributions of women to our understanding of language. It relates an account of linguistics as perceived and experienced by three American women in the first half of the twentieth century. Carol FEHRINGER A Reference Grammar of Dutch With Exercises and Key Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 xiii + 185~~. ti5.00 $69.95 (hardback) ISBN 0 521 64253 1 f16.95 $27.95 (paperback) ISBN 0 521 64521 2 Contents: Foreword Acknowledgements List of grammatical terms l/How to use this book 2/Didactic guide for beginners 3/List of entries 4/List of tables Reference grammar Exercises Key to the exercises Appendix (list of common irregular verbs) Index This book is aimed at English-speaking students of Dutch at beginning/intermediate level. It is designed to be practical and user-friendly. Each entry is linked to a set of exercises. Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 867 Joshua A. FISHMAN (ed.) Handbook of Language and Ethnic Identity Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 xii + 468~~. f50.00 ISBN 0 19 5124286 Contents: Contributors l/Introduction (Joshua A. Fishman) I Discipline and Topic per- spectives 2/Economies (Francois Grin) 3/Linguistic and Ethnographic Fieldwork (Nancy C. Dorian) 4/Education of Minorities (Tove Skutnabb-Kangas) 5/History (Harald Haarmann) 6/Nationalism (William Safran) ‚IIPolitical Science (Robert Philipson) 8/Psychology (Amado Padilla) 9/Sign Language and the Deaf Community (Cohn Baker) lO/Social Psychology (Karmela Liebkind) ll/Sociolinguistics (Joshua A. Fishman) 12/Sociology (Glyn Williams) 13/Second-Language Learning (Bernard Spolsky) II Region and Language Perspectives Americas 14/Amerindians (Teresa L. McCarty and Ofelia Zepeda) 15/African American Vernacular English (Sonja L. Lanehart) 16/Latin America (Ofelia Garcia) 17/The United States and Canada (Richard Y. Bourhis and David F. Marshall) Europe 1QThe Celtic World (Colin H. Williams) 19/Germany (James R. Dow) ZO/Scandinavia (Leena Huss and Anna- Riita Lindgren) Zl/The Slavic World (Miroslav Hroch) 22/Western Europe (Andree Taboret- Keller) Africa 23/Sub-Saharan Africa (Samuel Gyasi Obeng and Efuroshibina Adegbija) 24/Afro-Asian Rural Border Areas (Tope Omoniyi) 25/lhe Arab World (Maghreb and Near East) (Moha Ennaji) Asia and The Pacific 26/l%e Far East (Florian Coulmas) 27fIhe Pacific (Heather Loterington) 28/South and Southeast Asia (Harold F. Schiffman) 29/Concluding Comments (Joshua A. Fishman) Index This book is concerned with the connection between language and ethnicity. Section one examines various disciplinary perspectives, and introduces the basic human attributes that influence our understanding of language. Section two illustrates how these attributes take form in communities. All areas of the world are explored, with a focus both on individual his- tories and regional topics. Paul FOULKES / Gerard DOCHERTY (eds.) Urban Voices Accent Studies in the British Isles London: Arnold, 1999 xiii + 313~~. ;E45.00 (hardback) ISBN 0340706074 f16.99 (paperback) ISBN 0340706082 Contents: Acknowledgements Map of locations The International Phonetic Alphabet List of contributors l/Urban Voices - overview (Paul Foulkes and Gerard J. Docherty) 2/Pattems of variation and change in three Newcastle vowels: Is this dialect levelling? (Dominic Watt and Lesley Milroy) 3/Derby and Newcastle: Instrumental phonetics and variationist studies (Gerard J. Docherty and Paul Foulkes) 4/Sheffield dialect in the 1990s: Revisiting the concept of NORMS (Jana Stoddart, Clive Upton and J.D.A. Widdowson) S/West Wirral: norms, self-reports and usage (Mark Newbrook) 6/Sandwell, West Midlands: Ambiguous perspectives on gender patterns and models of change (Anne Grethe Mathisen) 7/Norwich: Endogenous and exogenous linguistic change (Peter Trudgill) I)/Dia.lect levelling: change and continuity in Milton Keynes, Reading and Hull (Ann Williams and Paul Kerswill) 9/South East London English: Discrete versus continuous modelling of consonantal reduction (Laura Toll- free) lO/Cardiff: A real-time study of glottalization (Inger M. Mees and Beverley Collins) ll/Glasgow: accent and voice quality (Jane Stuart-Smith) 12/Edinburgh: Descriptive material (Deborah Chirrey) 13/Standard English in Edinburgh and Glasgow: The Scottish Vowel Length Rule revealed (James M. Scobbie, Nigel Hewlett and Alice E. Turk) 14/(London)Derry: between Ulster and local speech - class, ethnic&y and language change 868 Survey of books I Lingua 11 I (2001) 841-894 (Kevin McCafferty) lS/Dublin English: Current changes and their motivation (Raymond Hickey) Appendix - Audio samples References Index Locations and varieties of English Names Subjects This book is a survey of the phonological variation and change in urban accents across Great Britain and Ireland. Accents and dialects are constantly undergoing small variations over time, but that change seems to have become increasingly rapid in the past few decades. Each chapter is divided into two parts. The first part provides a description of the accent fea- tures of the relevant urban center, and the second part discusses current theoretical and methodological issues. Barbara A. FOX / Dan JURAFSKY / Laura A. MICHAELIS (eds.) Cognition and Function in Language Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 viii + 291~~. E42.50 $64.95 (hardback) ISBN 1 575 86187 9 f15.95 $24.95 (paperback) ISBN 1 575 86186 0 Contents: Preface l/From Core to Periphery: A Study on the Directionality of Syntactic Change in Japanese (Kaoru Horie) 2/0n the Extension of Body-Part Nouns to Object-Part Nouns and Spatial Adpositions (Yo Matsumoto) 3/Noun Classes: Language Change and Leaning (Maria Polinsky and Dan Jackson) 4/Multifunctionality: The Developmental Path of the Quotative tte in Japanese (Ryoko Suzuki) S/Suppletion in the Paradigms of Copula Verbs (Ljuba Veselinova) 6/Learning the English Passive Construction (Patricia J. Brooks and Michael Tomasello) 7/Verb Roots and Caregiver Speech in Early Tzotzil (Mayan) Acqui- sition (Lourdes de Leon) 8/Cue Coordination: An Alternative to Word Meaning Biases (Vir- ginia C. Mueller Gathercole, Enlli M6n Thomas, and Soohee Kim) 9/A Cross-linguistic Study of Early Acquisition of Nouns and Verbs in English and Japanese (Chikako Sakurai) lo/Fake Guns and Stone Lions: Conceptual Blending and Privative Adjectives (Seana Coulson and Gilles Fauconnier) ll/Ike System of Metaphors for Mind and the Conceptual System of Ana- lytic Philosophy: A Study of the Metaphorical Constraints on Philosophical Discourse (George Lakoff) 12/Lexical Meaning and Discourse Patterning: The Three Mandarin Cases of ‚build™ (Meichun Liu) 13/Fuzzy at First Sight: The Case of Two Dutch Prepositions (Dominiek Sandra and Hubert Cuyckens) 14/The Semantics of Place, Time, and Way and their Strange Syntactic Behavior: A Construction Grammar Analysis (Christopher Johnson) lS/On a tue le president! The nature of Passives and Ultra-indefinites (Jean-Pierre Koenig) 16/The Syntactic Organization of Repair in Bikol (Steven Fincke) 17/ToneChoice Repair in Conversational Mandarin Chinese (Liang Tao, Barbara A. Fox, and Jule Gomez de Garcia) Index This volume is a selection of the papers presented at the third conference on Conceptual Structure, Discourse and Language (CSDL), held at the University of Colorado, Boulder, in May 1997. The goal of the series has been to enhance interaction among proponents of two analytic frameworks: ‚cognitive linguistics™ and ‚functional linguistics™, in this particular case in the area of data sources, methods, and research questions presented. Ikuko FUJIHIRA et al. (eds.) Studies in English Literature English number, 1999 Tokyo: The English Literary Society of Japan, 1999 146~~. ISSN 0387-3439 Contents: Articles l/Empire and Jane Austen: A Contrapuntal Reading (Roger Charles Nunn) Z/Sons and Lovers and Problems of Text-Editing (Yosuke Kato) 3/A Note on the Survey of books I Lingua I1 1 (2001) 841-894 869 Grammar of Steven™s ‚This™ (Masahiko Abe) 4/The Revised Edition of Tender is the Night, Reconsidered (Shinichiro Mori) Reviews S/Subject and Object in Renaissance Culture, Yoko Takakuwa (M. de Grazia, M. Quilligan and P. Stallybrass, eds.) 6/Walking the Victorian Streets: Women, Representation, and the City (Deborah E. Nord) 7/Ihe Sickroom in Vic- torian Fiction: The Art of Being Ill, Keji Kanameda (M. Bailin) g/Field Work: Sites in Lit- erary and Cultural Studies, Shoichiro Kawai (Marjorie Garber, P.B. Franklin and R.L. Walkowitz, eds.) 9/Romances of the Republic: Women, the Family, and Vilence in the Liter- ature of the Early American Nation, Hisayo Ogushi (Shirley Samuels) lo/At Emerson™s Tomb: The Politics of Classic American Literature, Naochika Takao (John Carlos Rowe) llftudies in Anaphora, Masahiro Kato (Barbara Fox, ed.) 12/Conceptual Structure, Dis- course and Language, Mariko Higuchi (Adele E. Goldberg, ed.) 13/intonational Phonology, Takeshi Kohno (D. Robert Ladd) 14/The Handbook of Contemporary Semantic Theory, Seizi Iwata (Shalom Lappin, ed.) 15/rhe Generative Lexicon, Yoko Sugioka (James Pustejovsky) 16/Studies in English Linguistics: A Festschrift for Akira Ota on the Occasion of His Eight- ieth Birthday, Christopher Tancredi (M. Ukaji et al., eds.) Synopses of the Articles Published in the Japanese Numbers, 1998 Index: 1998-1999 Daniele GAMBARARA / Lia FORMIGARI (eds.) New Italian Studies in Linguistic Histiography (Materialien zur Geschichte der Sprachwissenschaft und der Semiotik Band 9) Mtinster: Nodus, 1999 16Opp. ISBN 3-89323-309-l ISSN 0721-6920 Contents: l/Foreword (Daniele Gambarara and Lia Formigari) 2/Les etudes italiennes d™his- toriographie linguistique (Jean-Claude Chevalier) 3/Linguistic Pathologies in Ancient Greece: Aristotle on Aphasia (Patrizia Laspia) 4/Language and Passions: From Gorgias to Plato (Mauro Serra) S/A Brief Argument: The Enthymeme as a Model of Syllogism (Francesca Piazza) 6/Ihe Ambiguity of Words: From Aristotle to Augustine (Grazia Basile) 7/Embodied Meaning versus Mental Images: Hume, Reid and the Theory of Meaning (Maurizio Maione) 8/The Tree of Mind: Sensory Roots of Language in Herder (Ilaria Tani) 9/In Praise of Eclec- ticism: Mind and Language in A.F. Bernhardi (Pietro Perconti) lO/Physiognomical Founda- tions of Language: From Engel to Humboldt (Sara Fortuna) ll/Ihe Body of Words: Maine de Biran and Lordat on Language and Aphasia (Donata Chiricb) 12/A Motor Theory of Lan- guage: Bergson and Stricker (Rosalia Cavalieri) Resumes Index of Names and Key Words This volume is a collection of recent work in linguistic historiography by young Italian scholars. Two aspects of the volume need to be stressed. Firstly, there is interest on the part of the authors for non-linguistic and pre-linguistic cognitive operations. Secondly, the authors and themes of the volume cover a large area of the philosophical Italian tradition. James Paul GEE An Introduction to Discourse Analysis Theory and Method London: Routledge, 1999 viii + 176~~. 04.99 ISBN O-415-21 186-7 Contents: Acknowledgments l/Introduction 2Piscourses and social languages 3/Situated meanings and cultural models 4/Cultural models S/Discourse analysis 6/Processing and or- ganizing language 7/An example of discourse analysis Appendix: grammar in communica- tion References Index This book presents an integrated approach to discourse analysis: the analysis of spoken and written language as it is used to enact social and cultural perspectives and identities. This 870 Survey of books I Lingua 1 I1 (2001) 841-894 book is concerned both with a theory of language-in-use and a method of research, made up of a set of ‚tools of inquiry™ and strategies for using them. Heinz J. GIEGERICH Lexical Strata in English Morphological Causes, Phonological Effects (Cambridge Studies in Linguistics 89) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 ix + 329~~. $Z40.00 ISBN 0 521 55412 8 Contents: Acknowledgements l/A requiem for Lexical Phonology? Z/Affix-driven stratifi- cation: the grand illusion 3/Principles of base-driven stratification 4/Deriving the Strict Cyclicity Effect 5/Phonology and the literate speaker: orthography in Lexical Phonology 6/[r]-sandhi and liaison in RP 7/input vowels to [r]-sandhi: RP and London English 8/Syl- lables and strata Notes References Subject index Index of words, roots and affixes This book investigates the relationship between alternations in the sound patterns of words and morphological processes of the language. German and English are used as examples to question or redefine many of the assumptions of ‚lexical morphology and phonology™. What emerges is a newer, constrained theory of the lexicon. Manfred GijRLACH English in Nineteenth-century England An Introduction Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 xiii + 338~~. &40.00 $64.95 (hardback) ISBN 0 521 47101 X g14.95 $24.95 (paperback) ISBN 0 521 47684 4 Contents: List of abbreviations Preface Acknowledgements List of figures List of texts l/Introduction 2/Regional and social varieties 3/Spelling and pronunciation 4/inflection S/Syntax 6/Lexis 7/Text types and style 8/Previsional conclusions 9nexts lO/Information on texts and authors References Index of names Index of topics and titles Index of selected words and pronunciations This volume is an introduction to the distinctive features of Nineteenth-century English in England, which is considered to be the foundation of the present-day language. Speeches, newspaper articles, advertisements, Sunday School poetry and culinary pieces are examined. The first part of the book gives an overview of the subject, while the second part contains a selection of texts. Gyde HANSEN (ed.) Probing the Process in Translation: Methods and Results (Copenhagen Studies in Language 24) Copenhagen: Samfundslitteratur, 1999 187~~. ISBN 87-593-0793-5 ISSN 0905-9857 Contents: Editor™s preface l/Logging target text production with Translog (Amt Lykke Jakobsen) 2/Apuntes para una discusi6n sobre mCtodos de estudio de1 proceso de traduccidn (Maria Pilar Lorenzo) 3/Das kritische BewuStsein beim iibersetzen: Eine Analyse des uber- setzungsprozesses mit Hilfe von Trunslog und Retrospektion (Gyde Hansen) 4/Complejidad y comprensibn en la traducci6n juridica (Elisabeth Halskov Jensen) S/Ist Metaphemphobie heilbar? (Mette Skovgaard Andersen) 6/Time pressure in translation (As&id Jensen) 7/La seguridad de1 traductor profesional en la traducci6n a una lengua extranjera (Maria Pilar Lorenzo) S/A study of the use of dictionaries in Danish-English translation (Inge Livbjerg and Inger M. Mees) Appendix E-mail addresses Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 871 Steffen Leo HANSEN (ed.) World Knowledge and Natural Language Analysis (Copenhagen Studies in Language 23) Copenhagen: Sarnfundslitteratur, 1999 139~~. ISBN 87-593-0798-6 ISSN 09059857 Contents: Editor™s preface l/I™he project ‚Computer-Aided Ontology Structuring™ (CAOS) (Bodil Nistrup Madsen, Hanne Erdman Thomsen and Carl Vikner) 2/Typed feature specifica- tons for establishing terminological equivalence relations (Hanne Erdman Thomsen) 3/Can you be more specific? World knowledge and the analysis of specificity (Stig W. Jorgensen) 4/What are proper names and how do we identify them? (Mette Nelson) S/Properties of motion verbs (Christina Philp) 6/Locations on the meaning of phrases like i Paris (in Paris) and i fomgsel (in prison) (Finn Sorensen) Benjamin HARSHAV Language in Time of Revolution Contraversions: Jews and other differences Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 xii +234pp. &lo.95 $17.95 ISBN o-8047-3540-9 Contents: Preface A note to the reader I The Modern Jewish revolution: An Essay on the History of Culture and Consciousness l/Hansformations: Extrinsic and intrinsic 2/Ihe internal response to history 3/A new period in history 4/I™he centrifugal movement S/The force of negation 6/The new cultural trends 7/Ihe secular polysystem g/Assimilation 9/A Jewish century lo/The continuous rainbow ll/The individual 12/Flashback: collapse and vic- tory of the enlightenment 13/Polities and literature 14/Consolidation 15/Two endings to one revolution 16/rhe age of modernism II The revival of the Hebrew Language: Anatomy of a Social Revolution 17/The miracle of the revival of Hebrew 18/Ihe social existence of lan- guage lS/I™heory of twin systems 20/Language as a unifying force 21/The pitfalls of scholar- ship 22/The beginnings of the language revival 23/Ihree factors in the revival of the language 24/The life of ‚dead™ Hebrew 25/The revival of written Hebrew 26/New cells of society in a social desert 27/Ashkenazi or sephardi dialect? 28/Remarks on the nature of Israeli Hebrew 29/Principles of the revolution: A retrospective summary 30/Remarks toward a theory of social revolution III Sources on the Hebrew Language Revival, translated from Hebrew by Barbara Harshav 31/Rachel Katznelson: Language insomnia ( 19 18) 32/Yitzhak Tabenkin: The roots (1937) 33/Berl Katznelson: On the question of languages (1919) 34/Yosef Klauzner: Ancient Hebrew and modem Hebrew (1929) 35/Tsvi Shats: Exile of our classical poetry (1919) References Index This book is concerned with the worldwide transformations of Jewish culture and society and the revival of the ancient Hebrew language following the waves of pogroms in Russia in 1881, when large numbers of Jews in Eastern and Central Europe had to redefine their identity as Jews. Johannes HEINECKE Temporal Deixis in Welsh and Breton (Anglistische Forschungen Band 272) Heidelberg: Universitatsverlag C. Winter, 1999 339pp. Kt98.00 ATS715.00 SFr87.00 ISBN 3-8253-0922-3 Contents: Preface and Acknowledgements Glossary l/Introduction Z/Theoretical approaches 3/Time and Aspectuality 4/The Celtic languages Y™l™ime and aspectuality in the Welsh verbal system 6/Time and aspectuality in the Breton verbal system 7/Comparison and results A/Ver- bal paradigms B/Mutations C/Abbreviations Bibliography Index 872 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 In this volume, a theoretical framework of temporal and aspect& relations is established in order to allow comparison between languages. The Welsh and Breton temporal systems are compared, and although the two languages are genetically similar, their temporal systems dif- fer considerably, with Welsh having the more refined system. Lars HBRMBRBN English for Sale A Study of the Language of Advertising (Lund Studies in English 99) Lund: Lund University Press, 1999 201~~. SEK225.00 ISBN 91-7966-576-4 Contents: Reproductions: List of Plates Acknowledgements l/What is Advertising? 2/Advertising and society 3/The communicative situation 4/Questions and answers S/Visual and verbal strategies 6/0n sound and sense 7/Advertising as a cultural system Epilogue Ref- erences Index This book is a linguistic study of advertising in English in the 1990s. The two aims of the book are: first, to examine the various forms advertising takes, and second, to investigate the strategies used in advertising to persuade. The social function of advertising is also discussed. Mark JANSE / Sijmen TOL (eds.) Linguistic Bibliography for the Year 1995 And supplements for previous years Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1999 xc + 1647~~. NLG1020.00 $612.00 f357 ISBN 0792358368 Contents: Periodicals Abbreviations Directions for use General works l/Bibliography and organisation 2/Periodicals 3/Congresses 4/Pestschriften and miscellanies General linguistics and related disciplines 5/Bibliography and general 6/Phonetics and phonology 7/Grammar 8/Lexicon (lexicology and lexicography) 9/Semantics and pragmatics lO/Stylistics ll/Met- rics, versification 12/Danslation 13/Script, orthography 14/Psycholinguistics and neurolin- guistics l!I/Sociolinguistics and dialectology 16/Historical and comparative linguistics 17/Mathematical and computational linguistics 18/0nomastics Interrelationships between families of languages 19/Nostratic Indo-European languages 20/rocharian Zl/lndo-Iranian 22/Armenian 23/Anatolian 24/Phrygian 2VBalkan linguistics 26/Albanian 27lGreek 28/italic 29/Romance 3O/Lusitanian 31/Celtic 32/Germanic 33/BaltoSlavic Asianic and Mediter- ranean languages 34/Asianic languages 35/Mediterranean languages Basque and the ancient languages of the Iberian peninsula 36/Basque Hamito-Semitic (Afro-Asiatic) lan- guages 37/Semitic 38/Bgyptian (Egypto-Coptic) 39/0motic 40/Libyco-Berber 41/Chadic Caucasian languages 42/South Caucasian (Kartvelian) 43/North Caucasian Eurasiatic lan- guages 44/Ural-Altaic 45/Ainu 46/Paleosiberian (Paleosiatic) Burushaski Dravidian lan- guages 47/South Dravidian 48/South-Central Dravidian 49/Central Dravidian Languages of Mainland South-East Asia 50/Sine-Tibetan Sl/Kadai (Kam-Tai) and Tai languages 52/Hmong-Mien (Miao-Yao) 53/Austro_Asiatic 54fAndamanese Austronesian, Papuan and Australian languages 55lAustronesian 56/Papuan 57lAustralian Languages of Subsaharan Africa SS/Niger-Kordofanian 59/Nile-Saharan (including Songhay-Zarma) 6O/Khoisan Amerindian languages Cl/Languages of North and Middle America 62/Languages of South America and the Antilles Pidgins and Creoles 63/Romance_based pidgins and creoles 64/Bnglish-based pidgins and creoles 65/0ther language-based pidgins and creoles Sign lan- guages 66/American Sign Language 67/0ther sign languages Index of Names Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 873 David E. JOHNSON / Shalom LAPPIN Local Constraints vs. Economy (Stanford Monographs in Linguistics) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 x + 15Opp. f35.00 $49.95 (hardback) ISBN 1 575 86183 6 f12.95 $18.95 (paperback) ISBN 1 575 86182 8 Contents: Preface l/Introduction 2/Global Economy 3/Local Economy 4/Wh-Questions: Local Constraints vs. Feature Checking 5me Concept of Optimal Design in the Theory of Grammar References Index This book is a critique of the economy-of-derivation model of Chomsky™s Minimalist Pro- gram. It compares the economy-of-derivation model with local constraint models of grammar and concludes that the local constraint approach avoids the complexity problems of the econ- omy-of-derivation and provides a more satisfactory explanation of many linguistic facts. Rem+ KAGER Optimality Theory (Cambridge Textbooks in Linguistics) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 xiii + 452~~. g42.50 (hardback) ISBN 0 521 58019 6 f15.95 (paperback) ISBN 0 521 58980 0 Contents: Preface l/Conflicts in grammars 2/I™he typology of structural changes 3/Syllable structure and economy 4/Metrical structure and parallelism S/Correspondence in reduplica- tion 6/0utput-to-output correspondence 7/Learning OT grammars g/Extensions to syntax 9/Residual issues References Index of languages Index of subjects Index of constraints This book introduces Optimal&y Theory, in which universal, hierarchically structured con- straints interact with each other to produce an optimal output. The book covers not only phonological phenomena but also the learnability of OT grammars, and OT™s implications for syntax, as well as a selection of the existing OT research. Renk KAGER / Harry van der HULST / Wim ZONNEVELD (eds.) The Prosody-Morphology Interface Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 ix + 442~~. f45.00 $69.95 ISBN 0 521 62108 9 Contents: Contributors Preface l/Introduction (RenC Kager and Wim Zonneveld) 2/0n the moraic representation of underlying geminates : Evidence from Prosodic Morphology (Stuart Davis) 3/Verbal reduplication in three Bantu languages (Laura J. Downing) 4/Prosodic Mor- phology and tone: The case of Chichewa (Larry M. Hyman and Al Mtenje) S/Exceptional stress-attracting suffixes in Turkish: Representations versus the grammar (Sharon Inkelas) 6/Realignment (Junk0 It8 and R. Armin Mester) 7/Faithfulness and identity in Prosodic Mor- phology (John J. McCarthy and Alan S. Prince) 8/Austronesian nasal substitution and other NC effects (Joe Pater) 9/The prosodic base of the Hausa plural (Sam Rosenthall) lo/Prosodic optimal&y and prefixation in Polish (Grazyna Rowicka) ll/Double reduplications in parrallel (Suzanne Urbanczyk) Index of subjects Index of constraints Index of languages Index of names The central theme of this collection of papers in the field of prosodic morphology is an explanation of nonconcatenative morphology. This occurs in different forms, such as redupli- cation, in many languages. The perspective chosen in most papers in this volume is Optimal- ity Theory. 874 Survey of books I Lingua III (2001) 841-894 Simon KIRBY Function, Selection, and Innateness The Emergence of Language Universals (Oxford Linguistics) Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 xvi + 156~~. f37.50 (hardback) ISBN 0 19 8238118 g12.99 (paperback) ISBN 0 19 8238126 Contents: List of Figures List of Tables Abbreviations l/A Puzzle of Fit 2/The Impact of Processing on Word Order 3/Hierarchies and Competing Motivations 4/The Limits of Func- tional Adaptation 5/innateness and Function in Linguistics L/Conclusion References Index This book explores issues such as the universal properties of languages, language change, and the evolution of the human language capacity. The author discusses how far the univer- sal properties of language may be explained by examining the way it is used. He then uses computational models to simulate the evolution of language over many generations. This in turn is used to evaluate existing theories and their predictions. Jean-Pierre KOENIG Lexical Relations (Stanford Monographs in Linguistics) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 x + 213~~. f35.00 $49.95 (hardback) ISBN 1 575 86177 1 f11.95 $18.95 (paperback) ISBN 1 575 86176 3 Contents: l/Introduction 2nwo kinds of lexical relations 3/0n-line Type Construction 4/A typed constituent structure-based morphology S/The and/or nature of morphological processes 6/Conclusion A Type declarations Bibliography Name Index Subject Index This book aims at providing a model of lexical relations which reconciles the lexicon™s idiosyncratic and productive aspects. The proposed model, the Type Underspecified Hierar- chical Lexicon, is based on work in Head-driven Phrase-Structure Grammar. It is argued that all lexical relations reduce to categorization and that category intersection is the only mech- anism needed to model lexical processes provided lexical items can be stored partially under- specified as to their category membership. E.F. Komad KOERNER (ed.) Historiographia Linguistica Internal Journal for the History of the Language Sciences Volume XXVI: 1 / 2 1999 Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1999 253~~. ISSN 0302-5 160 Contents: Articles l/The Discovery of Old Welsh (Brynley F. Roberts) 2me Dispute among Vilnius Humanists regarding Latin, Lithuanian, and Ruthenian (Pietro U. Dini) 3/L™universalitC de la langue franqaise dans les grammaires de franGais pour les espagnols et dans les dictionnaires bilingues ant&ieurs g 1815 (Manuel Brufia Cuevas) 4/Le dictionnaire de l™abbk de l%pCe et les ‚signes mkthodiques™ (Renate Fischer) 5/A Matter of Consequenz: Humboldt, race and the genius of the Chinese language (John E. Joseph) (i/The Development of General Linguistics within the History of the Language Sciences in Poland, 1868-1968 (Zdzislaw Wasik) Reviews 7/Sketches of Slavic Scholars (Hemik Bimbaum) reviewed by Patrick SCriot @The Real Professor Higgins: The life and career of Daniel Jones (Beverley Collins and Inger M. Mees) reviewed by M.K.C. MacMahon) 9/Re-reading Saussure (Paul J. Thibault) reviewed by W. Terrence Gordon) lo/The Noblest Animate Motion: Biology, med- Survey of books 1 Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 875 icine and speech in pre-Cartesian linguistic thought (Jeffrey Wollock) reviewed by Renate Fischer ll/Derivation: Greek and Roman views on word formation (Jana Vaahtera) reviewed by Daniel J. Taylor 12/Language and Its Function (Pieter A. Verburg), transl. by Paul Salmon, reviewed by Paul T. Roberge Notes-documents Publications received Eva KOKTOVA Word-Order Based Grammar (Trends in Linguistics Studies and Monographs 121) Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1999 xv + 389~~. DM198.00 ISBN 3 11 016252 0 Contents: Preface and acknowledgements l/Introduction Z/Word-order 3JScoping expres- sions 4/Wh-extraction and cross-categorization of nominals SlAnaphoric reference 6/Formal- ization 7/conclusion References Index of authors Subject index This book proposes a new theory of grammar in which word order is the primary gram- matical principle. It is accompanied by the principle of lexical valency, and the principle of the recursive expansion of the sentence. Five basic types of word order are proposed, which vary along two dimensions, the free/fixed dichotomy and the deep/surface dichotomy. The languages considered in detail are Czech, Russian, English, German and French. Ronald W. LANGACKER Foundations of Cognitive Grammar Volume I Theoretical Prerequisites Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999 x + 516~~. g45.00 $75.00 (hardback) ISBN 08047 1261 1 216.95 $27.95 (paperback) ISBN o-8047-3851-3 Contents: Introduction and Overview I Orientation l/Guiding Assumptions 2/Fundamental Concepts II Semantic Structure 3/Cognitive Abilities 4/Domains S/Ihings 6/Atemporal Relations 7/Processes III Grammatical Organization 8/Valence Relations 9/Symbolic Units lO/Categorization and Context ll/Sanction and Distribution 12/Composition Conclusion and Preview Glossary References Index This is the first volume a two-volume series on cognitive grammar. The central claim of cognitive grammar is that grammar forms a continuum with lexicon and is fully describable in terms of symbolic units. The author argues that grammar is not autonomous with respect to semantics, but rather reduces to patterns for the structuring and symbolization of conceptual content. Ronald W. LANGACKER Foundations of Cognitive Grammar Volume II Descriptive Application Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999 xv + 589~~. f45.00 $75.00 (hardback) ISBN 08047 1909 8 E16.95 $27.95 (paperback) ISBN 0-8047-3852-l Contents: Review and Introduction I Nominal structure l/Nouns 2/Nominals: Functional Organization 3/Nominals: Grounding and Quantification 4/Nominal Constructions II Clause structure 5/The Auxiliary: Clausal Head 6/Ihe Auxiliary: Grounding 7nransitivity and Grammatical Relations (I/Marked Clause Structure 9/Ergativity and Case III Beyond the clause lO/Complex Sentences ll/Further Issues 12leoretical Discussion Reference matter Glossary References Index 876 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 This is the second volume a two-volume series on cognitive grammar. The central claim of cognitive grammar is that grammar forms a continuum with lexicon and is fully describ- able in terms of symbolic units. The author argues that grammar is not autonomous with respect to semantics, but rather reduces to patterns for the structuring and symbolization of conceptual content. This volume suggests how to use the theoretical tools presented in Vol- ume I, applying cognitive grammar to some phenomena drawn from English. Shalom LAPPIN / Elabbas BENMAMOUN (eds.) Fragments Studies in Ellipsis and Gapping Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 xiii + 298~~. f50.00 ISBN 0 19 5123026 Contents: Contributors Introduction l/Interactions of Scope and Ellipsis (Stuart M. Shieber, Fernando Pereira, and Mary Dahymple) 2/Ellipsis and Glue Languages (Richard Crouch) 3/An HPSG Account of Antecedent-Contained Ellipsis (Shalom Lappin) 4/VP Ellipsis and The Minimalist Program: Some Speculations and Proposals (Anne Lobeck) 5/V-Movement and VP Ellipsis (Edit Doron) 6/Pseudogapping Puzzles (Howard Las&) 7/Gapping, PF Merger, and Patterns of Partial Agreement (Joseph Aoun and Elabbas Benmamoun) 8/Direc- tionality of Movement in Ellipsis Resolution in English and Japanese (Jun Abe and Hiroto Hoshi) 9/VP Ellipsis: Toward a Dynamic, Structural Account (Ruth Kempson, Wilfried Meyer-Viol, and Dov Gabbay) Index This volume contains papers presented at the SOAS Ellipsis Workshop held at the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London, in September 1996. The contributions represent approaches to elliptic constructions from the fields of syntax, semantics and com- putational linguistics. Godehard LINK Algebraic Semantics in Language and Philosophy (CSLI Lecture Notes No. 74) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998 xii + 432~~. g45.00 $64.95 (hardback) ISBN 1 575 86091 0 E15.95 $24.95 (paperback) ISBN 1 575 86090 2 Contents: Preface Introduction lme Logical Analysis of Plurals and Mass Terms: A Lat- tice-theoretical Approach 2/Plural 3/Hydras. On the Logic of Relative Clause Constructions with Multiple Heads 4fGeneralized Quantifiers and Plurals 5/Je drie Apfel - three apples each: Quantification and the German je 6/First-Order Axioms for the Logic of Plurality 7/Ten Years of Research on Plurals - Where Do We Stand? 8/Algebraic Semantics for Nat- ural Language: Some Philosophy, some Applications 9/Quantity and Number lo/The French Revolution - a Philosophical Event ? ll/Algebraic Semantics of Event Structures 12/The Ontology of Individuals and Events 13me Philosophy of Plurality 14/Mereology, Second- Order Logic, and Set Theory Appendix: A Chapter in Lattice Theory Bibliography Subject Index Name Index This volume is a collection of the author™s applications in linguistic semantics. The main topics are plural determiners and plural quantification and collective, distributive, and inter- mediate predication. Michael LOSONSKY Humboldt : On Language On the Diversity of Human Language Construction and its Influence on the Mental Survey, of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 877 Development of the Human Species (Cambridge Texts in the History of Philosophy) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 xli + 296~~. f37.50 $59.95 (hardback) ISBN 0 521 66089 0 f13.95 $19.95 (paperback) ISBN 0 521 66772 0 Contents: Introduction Chronology Further reading Note on the text On Language l/Dis- tribution and cultural connections of the Malayan races; plan of the present work 2/General consideration of the course of man™s development 3/Ihe same, continued 4/Effects of exceptional mental power; civilization, culture and education S/Conjoint action of individ- uals and nations 6/The same continued 7/Transition to closer consideration of language S/Form of languages 9/Nature and constitution of languages as such lO/Sound-system of languages; nature of the articulated sound; sound-changes; allocation of sounds to con- cepts; designation of general relations; the sense of articulation; sound-system of lan- guages; technique of this ll/Inner linguistic form 12/Combination of sound with inner linguistic form 13/The procedure of language more fully explained; verbal affinity and ver- bal form 14/isolation, inflection and agglutination of words E/Verbal unity more closely examined; incorporative system of language; means of designating verbal unity; the pause; letter-change 16/Accent 17/incorporative system of languages; framing of the sentence 18/Congruence of sound-forms in languages with grammatical requirements 19/Main div- ision of languages, according to the purity of their formative principle ZO/Character of lan- guages; poetry and prose 21/Power of languages, to evolve felicitously from one to another; act of spontaneous positing in languages; the verb; the conjunction; the relative pronoun; inflected languages, considered in their progressive development; languages evolved from Latin 22/Retrospect on the course of the inquiry so far; languages that deviate from purely regular form 23/Nature and origin of less perfect language-structure; the Semitic languages; the Delaware language 24me Chinese language; the same, continued; the Burmese lan- guage ZS/Whether the polysyllabic language-structure has evolved from the monosyllabic Glossary Index This book is an edited version of Humboldt™s classic study of human language, first pub- lished in 1836. In it, he explores the universal structures of language and its relation to mind and culture. This volume is a translation by Peter Heath, together with an introduction by Michael Losonsky that places Humboldt™s work in its historical context, and discusses its rel- evance to contemporary work in linguistics, philosophy and cognitive science. Jouni MAHO A Comparative Study of Bantu Noun Classes (Orientalia et Africana Gothoburgensia 13) Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis, 1999 xv + 388~~. ISBN 91-7346-364-7 ISSN 1404-3556 Contents: List of figures, tables and maps List of abbreviations and symbols Acknowledge- ments l/Theoretical preliminaries 2me Bantu languages: An overview 3/Bantu noun class systems: A typological overview 4/Selected distributions and coherence areas S/Historical implications and speculations 6/Summary, conclusions and comments A/Noun class data for Bantu languages B/The map used for data presentation Bibliography Indexes This volume is a selective typological survey of the grammatical gender systems in the sub-Saharan Bantu languages. One aim is to describe grammatical variation in terms of typology and geographical patterning. Another aim is to relate that variation to diachronic issues. Specifically, matters of reconstruction and language change are discussed. 878 Survey of books I Lingua 11 I (2001) 841-894 Joyce T. MATHANGWANE Ikalanga Phonetics and Phonology A Synchronic and Diachronic Study (Stanford Monographs in African Languages) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 xvii + 342~~. f22.50 $34.95 ISBN 1-57586-163-1 Contens: List of Figures List of Tables Preface Abbreviations l/Introduction 2/Segment inventory, phonotactics, and selected aspects of morphology 3/Effects of the Close Vowels 4/Palatalization S/Velarization L/Aspiration and its effects 7/Depressor consonants and tone 8/Conclusion References Appendix A-C David McKNIGHT People, Countries, and the Rainbow Serpent Systems of Classification among the Lardil of Momington Island (Oxford Studies in Anthropological Linguistics 12) Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 x + 27Opp. g50.00 ISBN 0 19 5096215 Contents: l/Introduction I Individuals and Groups 2/Corning into Being and Going out of Being 3/People as Kin and Affines rl/Personal Names and Nicknames S/Places and Countries II Animals and Plants 6/Lardil Ethnozoology and Ethnobotany 7/Demiin Ethnozoology and Ethnobotany 8Marlda Kangka Ethnozoology and Ethnobotany III Totemic Thought 9/Sub- sections and Totemic Classification lO/Thuwathu the Rainbow Serpent ll/Markirii Sickness and the Rainbow Serpent 12/Dreamtime and Iconography Epilogue: Some Final Thoughts on Mythology, Land, and Kinship Notes Bibliography Index This volume is essentially about classification in the language of the Lardil, how they classify space, people, plants, animals, totemic beings, and the Rainbow Serpent in his different forms. Jakob L. MEY (ed.) RASK December 1997 7 (Intemationalt tidsskrift for sprog og kommunikation) Odense: Odense University Press, 1997 47PP. Contents: l/Jespersen™s v. Huddleston™s Syntactic Analysis by Sigfrido Di Giorgi Marianne MITHUN The Languages of Native North America (Cambridge Language Surveys) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 xxi + 773~~. ;E50.00 $80.00 ISBN 0 521 23228 7 Contents: List of maps Preface Transcription key Abbreviations used in glosses Introduction I The nature of the languages l/Sounds and sound patterns 2/Wards 3/Grammatical cat- egories 4/Sentences S/Special language II Catalogue of languages 6/Relations among the languages 7/Catalogue References with note on sources Index This book provides a survey of the several hundred languages indigenous to North America. Part 1 provides an overview of structural features, concentrating on those that are cross-linguistically unusual. Part 2 catalogues the languages by family, detailing genetic relationships, speakers, major literature and structural highlights. Survey of books I Lingua III (2001) 841-894 879 Paola MONACHESI A Lexical Approach to Italian Cliticization (CSLI Lecture Notes Number 84) Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications, 1999 xv + 247~~. ISBN l-57586-109-7 (hardback) l-57586-108-9 (paperback) Contents: Preface Abbreviations l/Introduction 2/The status of Italian clitics 3/The analysis of Italian clitics 4/The clitic si 5/The clitic loro 6me analysis of Italian restructuring verbs Appendix Bibliography Name Index Subject Index This volume examines the behavior of clitics in Italian and in certain southern Italian dialects. The author argues against the existence of a special class ‚clitics™ whose elements exhibit variable behavior. Thus, Italian clitics are treated as affixes in the context of a lexi- calist analysis. Barbara MOSER-MERCER / Dominic W. MASSARO (eds.) Interpreting International Journal of Research and Practice in Interpreting Volume 3, number 2, 1998 Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1998 99-2 1Opp. ISSN 1384-6647 Contents: l/Signs from the void: The comprehension and production of sign language on television (Ben Steiner) 2/The reading aloud of English language texts in simultaneously interpreted conferences (Alessandro Messina) 3/Meaning assembly in simultaneous in- terpretation (Robin Setton) Reviews 4/Conference interpreting explained (R. Jones) by Jennifer Mackintosh S/Machine translation and translation theory (C. Hauenschild and S. Heizmann, eds.) by Helge Ahrens 6/Cognitive processes in translation and interpreting (J.H. Dar&s, G.M. Shreve, S.B. Fountain and M.K. McBeath, eds.) by William P. Isham Authors in this issue Acknowledgements Announcement Gustav MUTHMANN Reverse English Dictionary Based on Phonological and Morphological Principles (Topics in English Linguistics 29) Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 1999 xxiv + 482~~. DM198.00 ISBN 3-11-016362-4 Contents: Preface Introduction l/What is a reverse dictionary and what is it used for? 2/A glimpse at the history of reverse dictionaries 3/Phonological aspects 4me macro-structure of the dictionary 5/The micro-structure of the entries 6/Spelling-to-sound and Sound-to-spelling correspondences The Reverse Dictionary Abbreviations and symbols References Appendix 1-2 This book is a Reverse Dictionary of the English language. The introduction includes a section on phonological concepts. Johanna NICHOLS Linguistic Diversity in Space and Time Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1999 xv + 358~~. $19.00 E15.25 ISBN 0-226-58057-l Contents: List of Illustrations List of Tables Acknowledgements Note on transcription and Abbreviations l/Introduction 2/Favored and Disfavored Grammatical Patterns ;T/Correlations between Types 4/Correlations of Structural Types with Grammatical Categories S/Diachronic 880 Survey of books I Lingua I I I (2001) 841-894 Stability: Genetic and Area1 6/Ihe Role of Geography: Structural Affinities between Areas 7/Linguistic Diversity: Geographical Distribution 8/Diversity and Linguistic Prehistory: Conclusion and Open Questions Appendixes l-4 Notes References Indexes Using a database of 174 languages, this book proposes means of describing, comparing, and interpreting linguistic diversity, both genetic and structural. The foundations are laid for a theory of diversity based on population science. Elke NOWAK (ed.) Languages Different in All Their Sounds Descriptive Approaches to Indigenous Languages of the Americas 1500 to 1850 (Studium Sprachwissenschaft Beiheft 3 1) Mtinster: Nodus, 1999 181~~. ISBN 3-89323-131-5 ISSN 0721-7129 Contents: l/Languages Different in All Their Sounds . . . Descriptive Approaches to In- digenous Languages of the Americas 1500 to 1850 - An Introduction (Elke Nowak) 2/Nebrija™s Linguistic oeuvre as a Model for Missionary Linguists (W. Keith Percival) 3/Tra- dition and Innovations in Sixteenth Century Grammars of New Spain (Cristiana Monzbn) 4/Many Ways of Saying, One Way of Writing: European Registration of Andean Languages in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries (Lindsey Crickmay) S/Of Children™s Games and Brewing Maize Beer: Text and Analysis of an Anonymous Vocabulary from Eighteenth Cen- tury Southern Peru (Sabine Dedenbach-Salazar Sknz) 6/Gabriel Sagard™s Dictionary of the Huron Tongue, 1632 (Rtidiger Schreyer) 7lEighteenth Century Descriptions of Arawak by Moravian Missionaries (Peter van Baarle) 8/Horatio Hale™s Grammatical Sketches of Native Languages of the American Northwest: The Case of Tsihaili-Selish (Michael Mackert) Index nominum This book is an introduction to the languages spoken in the Americas as encountered by the various European intruders. The aim of the book is not so much to provide a history of descriptive linguistics in the Americas as to provide an extensive selection of samples of descriptive work done on these languages over the last centuries. Rafael A. NUNEZ CEDENO / Alfonso MORALES-FRONT Fonologia generativa contempor6nea de la lengua espaiiola Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 1998 344~~. $65.00 (hardback) ISBN 0-87840-693-X $34.95 (paperback) ISBN o-87840-694-8 Contents: Prologo Introduccibn: La Fonologfa l/De La Fonetica Descriptiva a 10s Rasgos Distintivos 2/Fonologfa Autosegmental 3/Modelo Autosegmental Jemrquico 4/Teorfa de la Subespecificacidn S/La Silabificacion en Espaiiol 6JLa Fonologia Lexica 7/El Acento S/Teorfa de la Optimidad 9/El Acento y la Gptimidad Bibliografia Apuntes de transcripciones foneticas Indice de temas y lenguas This book presents an introduction to the concepts and fundamental principles of Gener- ative Phonology, as they apply to the Spanish Language. The most recent aspects of Gener- ative Phonology are used in the discussion. Jamal OUHALLA Introducing Transformational Grammar From Principles and Parameters to Minimalism Second edition London: Arnold, 1999 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 881 vi + 488~~. E17.99 ISBN 0 340 74036 1 Contents: Acknowledgements l/Language and Linguistic Theory I Phrase structure, Lexi- con and Transformations 2/Phrase Structure 3/I_exicon 4/Transformations I: Phrasal Cat- egories S/l%ursfonnations II: Terminal Categories H Principles and Parameters 6/X-Bar Theory 7/GTheory WCase Theory 9/Binding Theory and Control lo/Movement Theory III Language Variation ll/Head-Complement Order, Bounding Nodes, and Wh-in-situ 12/Null Subjects and Objects 13/Verb Second, VSO and NSO 14/incorporation Phenomena 15/Clitics and Cliticisation 16/I-lowering versus V-raising IV Minimalism 17/Minimalist Program 18/Copy Theory of Movement, and Binding 19/Checking Theory and Language Variation ZO/Bare Phrase Structure and Antisymmetry Bibliography Subject Index Index of Languages and Phenomena This book is an introduction to Transformational Grammar. Besides explaining the techni- cal machinery of the theory, it attempts to trace the shifts of perspective that have influenced the development of this theory™s major frameworks such as Government and Binding and Principles and Parameters. Gerard PETIT (ed.) Le statut d™unite lexicale LINX, no. 40 1999 Nanterre: Universite Paris X, 1999 283~~. Frs75.00 ISSN 0246-8743 Contents: l/Presentation (Gerard Petit) 2/La notion d™ccunite lexicale,, en linguistique et son usage en lexicologie (Fabienne Cusin-Berche) 3nermes et locuteurs (Marie-Francoise Mor- tureux) 4/Une ballade en topanymie: De la rue Descartes a la rue de Rennes (B. Bosredon et I. Tamba) 5/A propos de noms de ponts (L. Leboutet) 6/Unite lexicale et polylexicalite (Salah Mejri) 7/Etude distributionnelle de deux polystmies lexicales Reference, prototypie et pr&li- cation (Serge Meuleuc) 8/L™unite lexicale dam la perspective harrissienne (Danielle Leeman) 9/La double hybridation de l™unitt lexicale (Gerard Petit) lo/La querelle, au XIXﬂ siecle, autour des mots composes du type [VN]ﬁ: quels enjeux pour la grammaire? (Florence Villo- ing) ll/Statut lexical, statut lexicographique: Le nom compose dans le dictionnaire (Pascale Cheminee) 12/Les unites lexicales dans les grammaires dites lexicalis% (Karine Baschung) Hors-theme: 13/L™hypertexte comme hypermetaphore (Jacques Anis) Comptes rendus 14lJacques Anis, Texte et Ordinateur. L™e™criture re™inventke? Par Jean-Francois Jeandillou lS/Andree Borillo, L™espace et son expression en fiancais. Ophrys. Par Christ&e Marque- Pucheux Resumes Liste des numeros disponibles Tariq RAHMAN Language Education and Culture (SDPI Oxford) Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 xvi + 318~~. flO.OO ISBN 0 19 5791460 Contents: Acknowledgements General Introduction I Introduction l/Linguistics in Pakistan 2/Languages of the Proto-Historic Indus Valley H Introduction 3/Language-Teaching Pol- icies in Pakistan 4/The Medium of Instruction Controversy S/Language- Teaching in Pak- istani Madrussas 6/Pakistani Universities: The Colonial Legacy 7/University Faculty™s Share in Goods and Services in Pakistan HI Introduction g/Language, Knowledge, and Inequality 9/Language and Feminist Issues in Pakistan lO/Cultural Invasion and Linguistic Politeness Among English-Using Pakistanis ll/Language and Ethnic Politics in Pakistan 12/Language Planning and Politics in Pakistan Index 882 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841494 This book is an attempt to relate the three major themes of language, education and culture to the central issue of the distribution of power in Pakistan. Most issues raised in the book relate to the way language-planning, and the use of language in educational and cultural domains relate to power. Karl Heinz RAMERS Historische Vertinderungen prosodischer Strukturen Analysen im Licht der nichtlinearen Phonologie (Linguistische Arbeiten 400) Tiibingen: Niemeyer, 1999 vii + 165~~. DM94.00 0S686.00 SFR86.00 ISBN 3-484-30400-6 ISSN 0344-6727 Contents: Vorwort lnheoretische Grundlagen 2/Verners Gesetz 3/Mittelenglische L5ngung in offener Silbe (MEOSL) 4/L&gungen und Kiirzungen in der Entwicklung des Deutschen: das Wirken des ,Weight Law™ S/Resiimee 6/Anhang: Hinweise zu Transkriptionen und Abktizungen 7/Literatur This book applies the non-linear Autosegmental and Metric Phonology models to the description of Vowel Shift Chains. Three diachronic phenomena are analyzed. Jens Elmeg&rd RASMUSSEN Selected Papers on Indo-European Linguistics With a Section on Comparative Eskimo Linguistics 1 (Copenhagen Studies in Indo-European. Vol. 1) Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 1999 viii + 364~~. DKK450.00 $70.00 (two volumes) ISBN 87 7289 529 2 Contents: Preface l/Zur Morphophonemik des Urindogermanischen. Die Erkl%rung qualita- tiver, quantitativer und akzentueller Alternationen durch vorurindogermanische Lautgesetze, 1978 2/Determining proto-phonetics by circumstantial evidence: The case of the Indo-Euro- pean laryngeals, 1983 ~/TWO phonological issues in Gernanic, 1983 4/Miscellaneous mor- phological problems in Indo-European language I-II, 1985 S/Miscellaneous morphological problems in Indo-European languages III, 1984 6/A new rule of Indo-European accent: Greek t6ppoc / kop,udv; Germanic *wa.i@ / *Skanda, 1986 7/0n Hirt™s Law and laryngeal vocal- ization, 1986 8/Stray Indo-European notes, 1986 9/The Indo-Euopean origin of the Balto- Slavic -C- and -5 preterite, 1986 lO/ On the status of the aspirated tenues and the Indo-Euro- pean phonation series, 1987 lime make-up of Indo-European morphology, 1987 12/I™he constituent elements of the Indo-European personal pronouns, 1987 13/Die thrakischen Inschriften - BeitrZge zu einer neuen Deutung, 1987, 14/lateinisch similis, griechisch cSrnaA& altirisch samail und die Wurzel von lat. aid, 1987 15/Miscellaneuous morphological problems in Indo-European languages IV, 1987 16/Indo-European ablaut -i- - -e-/-o-, 1988 17/New evidence for infixal -o- in Indo-European: Ablaut re-/or-, 1988 18/The ablaut resistency of the ‚thematic vowel™: A Balto-Fennic parallel, 1988 19/0n some Slavic Words in -cb: k from laryngeal?, 1988 2O/rhe Indo-European background of the Slavic nasal-infix presents, 1988 Zl/Zur herkunft des slavischen Imperfekts, 1988 This book is the first volume of a reprint of most of Rasmussen™s articles on Indo-Euro- pean from the last two decades. Jens Elmeg&rd RASMUSSEN Selected Papers on Indo-European Linguistics With a Section on Comparative Eskimo Linguistics 2 (Copenhagen Studies in Indo-European. Vol. 1) Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 883 Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press, 1999 v + 365-708~~. DKK450.00 $70.00 (two volumes) ISBN 87 7289 529 2 Contents: 22/On the North Germanic treatment of -eww-, 1989 23/Germanic Verscharfung: Tying up loose ends, 1990 24/Same additional examples of PIE *-&- and *-hzZ-, 1990/91 25/italic and Celtic /a/ as a zero-grade substitute: An amendment to Kurylowics, 1990/91 26/Studies in the morphophonemics of the Indo-European protolanguage: A summary, 1990191 27/ih, uh and Rh in Indo-European: A phonetic interpretation, 1990/91 28/Trubet- zkoy™s thoughts on Indo-European: A myth come into fashion, 1991 29JDie Vorgeschichte der baltoslavischen Akzentuierung - Beitrage zu einer vereinfachten Losung, 1992 30/Notes on Indo-European aspiration, 1992 31/‚Woman™ in Indo-European, Celtic and Germanic: One paradigm or two? 1992 32/Alternation running wild: The case of the British Celtic subjunc- tive, 1992 33/initial h3 in Anatolian: A vote for chaos, 1992 34/Winter™s Law of Balto-Slavic lengthening - an unnatural fact? 1992 3S/Contributions to the understanding of Lithuanian metatony, 1992 36/Miscellaneous morphological problems in Indo-European languages V, 1992 37/I™he Indo-European amphikinetic paradigm type, 1996 SS/Szemerenyi™s theory of Indo-European i- and u-stems, 1996 39/0n the origin of the Latin imperfect subjunctive, 1996 40/‚&e origin of the Latin gerund and gerundive, 1996 41/0n the origin of the Germanic weak preterite, 1996 42/Ihe accentuation of the Slavic nasal presents, 1996 43/Miscellaneous problems in Indo-European languages VI, 1996 44/Same Armenian etymological intricacies 45fWeitere Quellen von idg. Is/? 46lIdg. Genitiv *-OS, Ablativ *-es 47/IE *-tro- for expected *-do- 48/Lit. pi&i und das griechische k-Perfekt 49/Miscellaneous problems in Indo-Euro- pean language VII Special Section Papers on Comparative Eskimo Linguistics: SO/Two notes on Eskimo diachrony, 1984 51/Zur Typologie der Eskimosprachen, 1987 52/Eskimo gemination and Sirenik vowel reduction, 1994 53/Futher rules of Siren& vowel gradation, 1996 This book is the second volume of a reprint of most of Rasmussen™s articles on Indo-Euro- pean from the last two decades. Irmengard RAUCH Semiotic Insights The Data Do the Talking Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1999 xvii + 300~~. 525.00 $45.00 ISBN 0-8020-4705-X Contents: Foreword by Thomas A. Sebeok Acknowledgments Introduction: Leitmotifs at the Nexus of Semiotics and Linguistics Part I l/Semiotics: A Fire in the Belly 2/Saussure: Roots of Today™s Linguistics 3/Linguistics and Semiotics Juxtaposed - 1 4/Peirce and Linguistics S/Semiotics and Metalanguage 6/Language as Inlay in Semiosis 7/The Narrative Inlay in Semiosis g/Narrative Configurated with Text and Discourse 9/Protosemiotic lo/Pro- tosemiotists ll/Semiotics: At the Turn of the Millennium Part II 12/Spelling of Sounds and Iconism 13/Accompanying Sound: Paralanguage 14/Causality 15/Analogy 16/Linguistics and Semiotics Juxtaposed - 2 17/A Language Evolves 18/Interlingual Translation of Signs 19/Language Change/Growth Begins 20me Lie Conclusion: Facts and Human Factors Bib- liography Name Index Subject Index This book is a collection of articles by Irmengard Rauch in which she shows how to conduct semiotic analyses of language, narrative, text and discourse. In part one, the fundamental tenets of the fields of linguistics and semiotics are introduced. In part two, linguistic data are analyzed within the semiotic paradigm. 884 Survey of books f Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 Felicia D. ROBERTS Talking about Treatment Recommendations for Breast Cancer Adjuvant Therapy (Oxford Studies in Sociolinguistics) Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 x + 131~~. E26.00 ISBN 0 19 5121910 Contents: l/Research Concerns and Review of Literature 2lAnalytic Approach 3/Phased Organization of the Adjuvant Therapy Visit 4/Discourse Identities: Establishing Participant Roles as Doctor and Patient S/The Recommendation 6/Conclusion Appendix A-B Notes Ref- erences Index In this book, conversations between oncologists and patients that have been operated for breast cancer are analyzed. The role of this kind of interaction is emphasized. One main theme is the concept of ‚expertise™ as it is viewed by patients and oncologists. Mario ROSS1 L™intonation Le systeme du fran~ais: Description et modelisation (Collection l™essentiel fran~ais) Paris: Gphrys, 1999 237~~. F82.00 ISBN 2-7080-0912-5 Contents: Avertissement Sigles et abreviations Avant-propos Introduction l/Pr&nmuures theoriques 2/Grammaire de l™intonation pragmatique 3/Grammaire de l™intonation syntaxique ~/IX module rythmique Conclusion g&&ale Glossaire Bibliographie Index des notions This book attempts to answer the question of what intonation is, whether it is a structural construct, or a simple melody, and if the former, how should its network of relations be defined. The author™s own model consists of three modules: the pragmatic grammar of in- tonation, the syntactic grammar of intonation and the rhythmic module. This model is applied to French. Juhani RUDANKO Diachronic Studies of English Complementation Patterns Eighteenth Century Evidence in Tracing the Development of Verbs and Adjectives Select- ing Prepositions and Complement Clauses Lanham: University Press of America, 1999 v +143pp. $39.50 ISBN o-7618-1407-8 Contents: l/Introduction 2/rwo Types of To Complements of Adjectives 3/In -ing in a Diachronic Perspective 4/At -ing in a Diachronic Perspective 5/0n -ing in a Diachronic Per- spective 6/With -ing in a Diachronic Perspective 7/Concluding Observations Bibliography Index Index of Verbs and Adjectives This book examines a number of patterns of sentential complementation introduced by prepositions over the last three centuries. The prepositions in question are central to the Eng- lish language. Both emerging and declining patterns are examined. Ivan A. SAG / Thomas WASOW Syntactic Theory A Formal Introduction (CSLI Lecture Notes Number 92) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 x + 481~~. f47.50 $74.95 (hardback) ISBN 1 575 86161 5 f17.95 $29.95 (paperback) ISBN 1 575 86160 7 Survey of books I Lingua 1 I1 (2001) 841-894 885 Contents: Preface l/Introduction 2/Same Simple Theories of Grammar 3jAnalyzing Fea- tures of Grammatical Categories 4/Complex Feature Values 5/Semantics ~/HOW the Gram- mar Works 7/Binding Theory g/The Structure of the Lexicon 9/Realistic Grammar lo/The Passive Construction ll/Nominal Types: Dummies and Idioms 12/infinitival Complements 13/Auxiliary Verbs 14/Variation in the English Auxiliary System 15/Lang-Distance Depen- dencies 16/From Rule to Sign Appendix A-B Glossary References Subject Index Name Index This introductory book focuses on the development of precisely formulated grammars whose empirical predictions can be directly tested. The emphasis is on predication and eval- uation of grammatical hypotheses, as well as on integrating syntactic hypotheses with matters of semantic analysis. Problem solving is also emphasized; the problem sets are drawn from a variety of languages other than English. Richard SALOMON Indian Epigraphy A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and the Other Indo-Aryan lan- guages Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 xxi + 378~~. f45.00 ISBN 0 19 5099842 Contents: Abbreviations Note on Citation and Bibliographic Form l/The Scope and Signifi- cance of Epigraphy in Indological Studies 2/writing and Scripts in India 3/Ihe Languages of Indic Inscriptions 4/Survey of Inscriptions in the Indo-Aryan Languages S/Methods of Epi- graphic Study 6/The History of Indian Epigraphic Studies 7/Epigraphy as a Source for the Study of Indian Culture 8/Bibliographic Survey Appendix: Selection of Typical Inscriptions l-15 Bibliography Index of Inscriptions Cited Index This book provides a general survey of all the inscriptional material in the Sanskrit, Prakrit, and modem Indo-Aryan languages. The documents date from a range of more than two millennia, and come from India and the neighboring nations of South Asia, as well as in many parts of Southeast, central, and East Asia. The inscriptions are written for the most part in the Brahmi and Kharosthi scripts. Harold F. SCHIFFMAN A Reference Grammar of Spoken Tamil Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 xxii + 232~~. f35.00 $59.95 ISBN 0 521 64074 1 Contents: l/Phonology and Transliteration 2me Nominal System 3/I™he Tamil Verb Phrase 4fPronouns and Pro-forms S/Adjectives 6lSyntax: Introduction 7/Complex Syntax and Related Topics g/Appendix: Literary Tamil Equivalents of Spoken Tamil Paradigms Refer- ences Index This book is a reference grammar of the standard spoken variety of Tamil, a language with 65 million speakers in India, Sri Lanka, Malaysia and Singapore. The spoken variety is rad- ically different from the standard literary variety. This book contains examples both in Tamil script and in transliteration. Wolfgang P. SCHMID (ed.) Hydronymia Germaniae Begriindet von Hans Krahe Reihe A. Lieferung 17 Das Flussgebiet der Have1 (ohne die Spree) Bearbeitet von Sophie Wauer 886 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 (Kommission ftlr vergleichende Sprachwissenschaft der Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur-Mainz) Stuttgart: Franz-Steiner Verlag, 1999 406~~. ISBN 3-515-07516-X Edgar W. SCHNEIDER (ed.) English World-Wide A Journal of Varieties of English, vol. 19:2, 1998 Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1998 ii + 161-322~~. Hf1285.00 HfllOO.OO individual ISSN 0172-8865 Contents: Articles l/From accent to marker in Cajun English: A study of dialect formation in progres (Sylvie Dubois and Barbara M. Horvath) 2/Nigerian English in political telemar- keting (V.O. Awonusi) 3/Ward-formation in Pakistani English (Robert J. Baumgardner) 4/R%y you talk like that? : The pragmatics of a why construction in Singapore English (Lubna Alsagoff, Zhiming Bao and Lionel Wee) Text S/A sermon i Scats (Alasdair Allan) Obituary 6/Caroline Macafee (A.J. Aitken) Reviews 7/The English Languages / Anthea Fraser Gupta (Tom McArthur) g/Language Variety in the South Revisted / Michael Aceto (Cynthia Bem- stein, Thomas Nunnally and Robin Sabino, eds.) Shorter notices 9/Vemacular Literacy: A Re-evaluation (Andree Tabouret-Keller, Robert B. LePage, Penelope Gardner-Chloros and Gabrielle Chloros, eds.) lo/African-American English: Structure, History and Use (Salikoko S. Mufwene, John R. Rickford, Guy Bailey and Johnb Baugh, eds.) ll/Speaking and Social Identity: English in the Lives of Urban Africans; Times-Chambers Essential English Dic- tionary (Lawrence B. Breitborde) 12/Indian English: Texts and interpretation (Raja Ram Mehrotra) 13/New Zealand English and English in New Zealand (Elizabeth Gordon and Tony Deverson Publications received Edgar W. SCHNEIDER (ed.) English World-Wide A Journal of Varieties of English, vol. 20: 1, 1999 Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1999 ii + 178~~. Hf1300.00 Hfl100.00 $50.00 individual ISSN 0172-8865 Contents: Articles l/Eithteenth-century Sierra Leone English: Another exported variety of African American English (Michael Montgomery) 2/The Trilateral Process in Cameroon English phonology: Underlying representations and phonological processes in non-native Englishes (Augustin Simo Bobda and Beban Sammy Chumbow) 3/The functions and status of English in Hong Kong: A post-1997 update (David C.S. Li) 4/Shades of things to come: Embryonic variant in New Zealand English sound changes (Elizabeth Gordon and Peter Trudgill) 5/Getting in a flap or turning off the tap in Dunedin? Stylistic variation in New Zealand English intervocalic (-t-) (DOM Bayard) Reviews 6/Ulster-Scats: A Grammar of the Traditional Written and Spoken Language, Jeffrey L. Kallen (Philip Robinson) 7/Language, Society and Education in Singapore: Issues and Trends. 2ﬂd ed., Jean D™Souza (Saravanan Gopinathan, Anne Pakir, Ho Wah Kam and Vanithamani Saravan, eds.) Shorter Notices g/English as a Global Language (David Crystal) 9nhe Future of English? A Guide to Fore- casting the Popularity of the English Language in the 21ﬂ™ Century (David Graddol) lo/The Major Varieties of English: Papers from MAVEN 97 (Hans Lindquist, Staffan Klintborg, Magnus Levin and Maria Estling, eds.) ll/The New Oxford Dictionary of English (Judy Pearsall, ed.) 12/Language in Canada (John Edwards, ed.) Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 887 Peter SEITEL The Powers of Genre Interpreting Haya Oral Literature (Oxford Studies in Anthropological Linguistics 22) Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 viii + 248~~. g36.00 ISBN 0 19 5 11700x Contents: l/Introduction I Style, Theme, and Composition in Genre 2/The Logic of Proverbs 3/Emergent Complexities and Complex Emergencies in Folktales 4/Heroic Society in Interlacustine Africa II A Genre-Powered Reading of Kachwenyanja S/Stanzas Need No Rhyme 6/Significance Needs Time 7/Summary and Conclusion Appendix A-B Refer- ences Index This book describes and illustrates an analytic approach to Haya oral literature. The author argues that breath, voice, silence, parallelism, marked forms, fictional logic, and semantic contrasts all interact to form what had previously been referred to as the ‚line™ of an oral nar- rative. Jeremy J. SMITH Essentials of Early English London: Routledge, 1999 xiv + 251~~. 04.99 ISBN O-415-18743-5 Contents: Preface I Descriptive material l/Introduction 2/Describing language 3/01d Eng- lish 4/Middle English 5/Early Modem English II Illustrative texts A/Old English Texts B/Middle English texts C/Early Modqm English texts III Bibliography, glossary and the- matic index Annotated Bibliography Old English Glossary Thematic Index This book is an introduction to the early stages of the English language: Old English, Mid- dle English, and Early Modem English. It is designed as a handbook for students for students beginning the study of early English language, whether for linguistic or literary purposes. Neil SMITH Chomsky: Ideas and Ideals Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 ix + 268~~. f35.00 $54.95 (hardback) ISBN 0 521 47517 1 g12.95 $19.95 (paperback) ISBN 0 521 47570 8 Contents: Acknowledgments Introduction l/The mirror of the mind 2me linguistic founda- tion 3/Psychological reality 4/Philosophical realism: Commitments and controversies S/Ian- guage and freedom Conclusion Envoi Notes and references Bibliography Index Noam Chomsky is one of the leading intellectual figures of modem times. This book is an account of Chomsky™s work and influence, more specifically his key contributions to the study of language and the study of mind. Ho-Min SOHN The Korean Language (Cambridge Language Surveys) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 xx + 445~~. &40.00 $64.95 (hardback) ISBN 0 521 36123 0 (paperback) ISBN 0 521 36943 6 Contents: Maps Preface Abbreviations l/Introduction 2/Genetic affiliation 3/Historical development 4/Dialects S/Lexicon 6/Writing systems 7/Sound patterns 8/Ward structure 9/Grammatical structure Select bibliography Index 888 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 8416894 This book provides a survey of the Korean language, covering its speakers, genetic affili- ation, historical development, dialects, lexicon, writing systems, sound patterns, word struc- ture, and grammatical structure. Helmi B. SONNEVELD / Kurt L. LOENING (eds.) Terminology International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Issues in Specialized Communication Volume 4:2, 1997 Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1999 199-374~~. NLG240.00 (Institutions) ISSN 0929-9971 Contents: l/A preliminary investigation of the nature of frequency distributions of con- stituent elements of terms in terminology (Kyo Kageura) 2/Automating the construction of bilingual terminology lexicons (David A. Hull) 3/Recognition and acquisition: Two inter- related activities in corpus-based term extraction (Christian Jacquemin) ~/YOU say ‚flatbed colour scanner™, I say ‚colour flatbed scanner™ (Lynne Bowker) S/Towards a standardised presentaion of compounds in Avot Yeshurun™s later poetry (1974-1992) (Gidon Avraham) Book reviews 6/Elsevier™s Dictionary of Information Technology: In English, German, French by J.P. Hoepelman, R. Mayer, J. Wagner (Deborah Fry) 7/Compendium of Chemi- cal Terminolgoy, IUPAC Recommendations by Alan D. McNaught and Andrew Wilkin- son, compilers (G. Clark Dehne) VClinical Trials Dictionary. Terminology and Usage Recommendations by Curtis L Meinert (John H. Dirckx) 9/Terminology - system and con- text. Nordic mini-symposium 1996, by Johan Myking, Randi Saeboe, Bertha Toft, eds. (Havard Hjulstad) lO/rerminologie et Interdisciplinarite -Actes de Colloque organise en avril 1996 par le Centre de Terminologie de Bruxelles by C. De Schaetzen, ed. (Jos de Cort) Books Received Reports on Meetings ll/ISK0™98, Lille, France, 25-29 August 1998 (Lynne Bowker) 12/Languages for Specific Purposes and Academic Purposes: Inte- grating Theory and Practice, Dublin, Ireland, 6-8 March 1998 (Lynne Bowker) 13/EURALEX™98, Liege, Belgium, 4-8 August 1998 (Lynne Bowker) Teminology Calen- dar Authors in this Issue Jean STILWELL PECCEI Child Language Second Edition (Language Workbooks) London: Routledge, 1999 ix + 116~~. E9.99 ISBN O-415-19836-4 Contents: Using this book Acknowledgements l/Starting to talk 2/Finding out what words mean 3/Building up a dictionary 4/Putting together sentences J/Building longer sentences 6/Saying ‚no™ and asking questions 7lBecoming a word maker g/Having a con- versation 9/Learning to get the sounds right lo/Still learning: ‚Dogs™ and ‚Gogs™ ll/Exploring children™s language: Projects 12/Going on from here: central issues and study questions Further reading Corpus of child-language data Answers to further exercises Index In this introductory textbook, the major areas of linguistic analysis involved in the study of children™s language are outlined. The key areas covered are: vocabulary development, word and sentence structures, conversational skills and pronunciation. Jean STILWELL PECCEI Pragmatics (Language Workbooks) Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 889 London: Routledge, 1999 ix + 96pp. E9.99 ISBN O-415-20523-9 Contents: Using this book Acknowledgements l/What is pragmatics? 2/Entaihnent 3/Pre- supposition 4/Ihe co-operative principle and implicature S/More on implicatures 6/Speech acts 7/Mare about speech acts 8/Politeness 9/Making sense lo/Exploring pragmatics: projects Answers to further exercises Bibliography Index In this introductory textbook, pragmatics, the study of meaning derived from context is examined. Gideon TOURY / JosC LAMBERT (eds.) Target International Jounal of Translation Studies 11: 1, 1999 Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1999 iv + 2OOpp. NLG255.00 NLG116.00 $58.00 individual ISSN 0924-1884 Contents: Articles l/Conceptual Work and the ‚Translation™ Concept (Sandra Halverson) 2/A Cognitive Approach to Source Text Difficulty in Translation (Stuart Campbell) 3/CAT Tools in an Academic Environment: What Are They Good For? (Dorothy Kenny) 4/Trans- lation among Manila™s Book Publishers (Ubaldo Stecconi) S/Responsibility with Loyalty: Oral History Texts in Translation (Barbara Reeves-Ellington) 6/Interdisciplinarity in Trans- lation Studies (Wolfram Wilss) Reviews 7/I™he Translator as Communicator, Christina Schtifner (Basil Hatim and Ian Mason) 8/Das ubersetzen im Mittelater (13. Und 14. Jahrhundert). Band 1: Das arabisch-lateinishe Mittelalter, Anthony Pym (Hans J. Vermeer) 9/Das iibersetzen im Mittelalter (13. Und 14. Jahrhundert). Band 2: Deutsch als Zielsprache, Macia Riutort I Riutort (Hans J. Vermeer) lo/Nonverbal Communication and Translation: New Perspectives and Challenges in Literature, Interpretation and the Media, Vbonique Tra- verso (Fernando Poyatos, ed.) ll/&ersetzungswissenschaft in Brasilien: Beitrgge zum Sta- tus von ‚Original™ und ijbersetzung, John Milton (Michaela Wolf, Hrsg.) 12/Les Remarques de 1™AcadCmie franqaise sur le Quinte-Curce de Vaugelas, 1719-1720: Contribution B une histoire de la norme grammaticale and rhktorique en France, Nathalie Foumier (Wendy Ayres-Bennett and Philippe Caron) 13/iibersetzungsunterricht: Eine Ei&ihrung. Begrif- fliche Grundlagen und methodische Orientierungen, Roland Freihoff (Wolfram Wilss) 14/Das Wortspiel in der ubersetzung: Stanilaw Lems Spiele mit dem Wort als Gegenstand interlingualen Transfers, Dirk Delabastita (Zygmunt TeFza) lS/Dictionary of Translation Studies, Andrew Chesterman (Mark Shuttleworth and Moira Cowie) 16/Simultandol- metschen als Gegenstand der interdisziplintien Forschung, Daniel Gile (Ingrid Kurz) 17/rranslation as Intercultural Communication: Selected Papers from the EST Congres - Prague 1995, Sandra Halverson and Jiirgen Gercken (Mary Snell-Homby, Zuzana Jettmarova and Klaus Kaindl, eds.) 18/Becoming a Translator: An Accelerated Course, Jean Delisle (Douglas Robinson) New Books at a Glance 19/0n Translating French Literature and Film, Rainier Grutman (Geoffrey T. Harris, ed.) 20/The Sociolinguistics of Interlingual Communi- cation, Michel Ballard (Eugene A. Nida) Zl/Translation and Gender: Translating in the ‚Era of Feminism™, Marysa Demoor (Luise von Flotow) 22/I™ext-Kultur-Kommunikation: Trans- lation als Forschungsaufgabe. Festschrift aus AnlaR des 50jtigen Bestehens des Instituts fiir ijbersetzer- und Dolmetscherausbildung an der Universittit Graz, Leona Van Vaeren- bergh (Nadia Grbia: and Michaela Wolf, Hrsg.) Other Books Received R.L. TRASK Language The Basic, Second edition 890 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 London: Routledge, 1999 xiv + 244~~. &9.99 ISBN 0-415-20089-X Contents: List of illustrations To the reader Acknowledgements l/The uniqueness of human language 2me grammatical backbone 3/Language and meaning 4/Variation in language S/Change in language 6/Language in use 7/Language, mind and brain g/Children and lan- guage 9/Attitudes to language Going further Glossary References Index This book is a concise introduction to the study of language. It contains, among others, a chapter on ‚language in use™, a section on sign language, and a glossary of key terms. Svetlana VOGELEER / Walter de MULDER / Ilse DEPRAETERE Tense and Aspect (Belgian Journal of Linguistics 12, 1998) Amsterdam: Benjamins, 1998 ix + 226~~. NLGll5.00 (libraries/institutions) ISSN 0774-5141 Contents: Introduction (Svetlana Vogeleer, Walter de Mulder and Ilse Depraetere) l/The progressive in Japanese and temporal advancement in narrative (Seiki Ayano) 2/0n the semantics of the Spanish progressive sequence Ir + Gerund (Anna Espunya) 3lFrequency and tense use in French (Arie Molendijk and Hemiette de Swart) 4/Adverbials of aspectual focus and negation in Dutch (Hans Smessaert) S/Aspect of (un)boundedness (Guido vanden Wyn- gaerd) 6/Changing culture changing grammar: A socio-linguisic hypothesis on the loss of the perfectum in Romance (Maria Manoliu) 7/A perfect piece? The present perfect and passe™ compose™ in journalistic texts (Dulcie Engel) 8/‚Tell me, Socrates . . . ™ : Verbal aspect, focus and questioning strategies in ancient Greek (Jean-Christophe Pitavy) 9me linguistic expres- sion of a semantic relation: The connectives of simultaneity in French (Sophie Aslanides) lo/Reference values in present-tense When-clauses (Rosalind Dilys) ll/The referentiality of tenses (Theo Janssen) Peter WAGENER (ed.) Sprachformen Deutsch und Niederdeutsch in europaischen Beziigen Festschrift fur Dieter Stellmacher zum 60. Geburtstag (Zeitschrift ftir Dialektologie und Linguistik heft 105) Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1999 374~~. DM/sFr148.00 bS1080.00 ISBN 3-515-07522-4 Contents: Vorwort Tabula gratulatoria Abktirzungsverzeichnis Hinweise zur Transkription I Namenforschung: Vornamen l/Das Namenglied DIET in deutschen Vomamen zwischen 1400 und 2000 (Wilfried Seibicke) II Niederdeutsche Philoiogie Zu den llteren Sprach- stufen des Niederdeutschen 2/Eiue bislang unbekannte mittelniederdeutsche Hands&rift von Hermann Botes Schichtbuch und ihr Ort in der iiberlieferung (Herbert Blume) 3/Zum Ausgleich der Ablautaltemanzen im Niederdeutschen (Martin Durrell) 4/Niederdeutsche Autographe in Walsroder Gebetbtichem von 1649 (Heinrich Kroger) S/Zur Gottinger Schreibsprache bei Beginn des Sprachenwechsels (Maik Lehmberg) 6/Gesprochenes Hochdeutsch in der norddeutschen Stadt. Zur Modalitlt des Sprachwechsels im 16. Und 17. Jahrhundert (Arend Mihm) 7/Niederdeutsche Zaubersprtiche. Konstanz und Variation (Ingrid Schroder) g/Die Borchlingschen ‚Reiseberichte™, ein Gottinger Beitrag zur Niederdeutschen Philologie (Karl Stackmann) Zur sprachlichen Erforschung des gegenwtirtigen Niederdeutschen 9/Zur Syntax des Verbs doon im Neuniederdeutschen (Heinz-Wilfried Appel) lO/Zur Situation des Niederdeutschen zwischen Wittenberg und Salzwedel. Zwis- chenbilanz einer soziolinguistischen Untersuchung in Sachsen-Anhalt (Ursula Follner) Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 891 ll/Forschungsstand und Regionalsprachenfiirderung in Ostfriesland. Allgemeines zum Stand des Niederdeutschen in Norddeutschland (Elsa Isaksson Biehl) 12/Norddeutsche Gerliuschlexeme. Sprachschopfungen fur Comics (Dieter Mohn) 13/‚Se lijtt nix te Potte braa- nen™. Geschlechtsspezifische Idiome in der westmtinsterl%ndischen Mundart (Elisabeth Piirainen) 14/Wdrterbuchbenutzer und Informationstheorie. Die Lexikographie als ‚Storquelle™ im iibertragungskanal Sprache - Benutzer (Frank Schnibben) lS/New Melle, MO 63365 : Sprecherin 21, Sprecher 34 (Jan Wirrer) Zur niederdeutschen Literatur 16/Der ostfriesische Dichte Enno Hektor und der ‚Gesang eines finnischen Landmadchens™ (Joachim Boger) 17/Eine niederdeutsche Welt. Bemerkungen zu Adolf Stuhlmann (1838-1924) (Udo Tinnemeyer) III Deutsche Philologie Sprachwissenschaft 18/Das Kind, das Individuum, das Genie. Versuch einer Ehrenrettung des deutschen Neutrums (Robert Hinderling) 19/Die von deutschen Basiswortem abgeleiteten Verben mit dem Suffix -ieren - eine ver- schwindende, weil schwach produktive Verbgruppe. Bemerkungen zur Karriere der deutschen -ieren-Verben im Wandel der Sprache und Zeit (Annikki Koskensalo) 2OJIn Vor- bereitung des X. Parteitages. ‚Brigadetagebiicher™ als Quelle fiir die Sprachgeschichts- forschung (Norbert Nail) Zl/ijber den modistischen Sprachbegriff (Lauri Sepp%nen) 22/Auj S&&e! Auf als lokative Praposition ohne Artikel im Ruhrdeutschen (Peter Wagener) 23/Texte, Diskurse, Querschnitte unter Berticksichtigung vertikaler Strukturen (Sigurd Wichter) 24/Zum Problem der phonetisch-phonologischen Beschreibung in Zeiten dialektalen Wandels (Peter Wiesinger) Literaturwissenschaft 25/‚Denk- und Sprechweise der Haidjer™. Zur Humboldt-Rezeption bei Hermann Lens (Jorg Schilling) 26/Ist eine strukturelle Theorie der Dialektliteratur moglich? (Martin Schrader) 27/Raum und Zeit als Koordinaten der Liter- aturgeschichte (Wolfgang Stellmacher) IV Europiiische Philologien Sprachwissenschaft 28/Lassen sich Anglizismen verbieten? Zum Wortschatz der Informatik in der fachbezogenen Presse Frankreichs (Christian Ahlers and Gilnter Holtus) 29/Dialektologie und Zeit- geschichte: Die Bezeichnung ‚Deutscher™ in den niederlandischen Mundarten (Jan Bems) 30/Mandel (Jan Goossens) 31/Zur Stellung der Dialekte unter den Existenzfonnen des Rus- sischen (Werner Lehfeldt) 32/Westfiien in Ostfinnland. Sprachbezogene Beobachtnngen der Umsiedler (Pekka Lehtimaki) 33/Das alteste Fachworterbuch mit einem deutschen, nieder- larrdischen und polnischen Teil (Stanislaw Predota) 34/Einige etymologische Betrachtungen zu giespeln ‚schnell laufen™ (Antonius A. Weijnen) V Namenforschung: Familienamen 35lStellmacher und Wagener. Zur Frequenz und Geographie der aus der Berufsbezeichnung fur den Wagenmacher abgeleiteten deutschen Familienamen (Peter Wagener) VI Verzeichnis der Schriften von Dieter Stellmacher This volume is a Festschrift for Dieter Stellmacher on the occasion of his 60ﬂ birthday. The theme of the volume is German and Low German in European Relations. Douglas WALTON One-Sided Arguments A Dialectical Analysis of Bias (SUNY Series in Logic and Language) New York: SUNY, 1999 xix + 295~~. $20.95 ISBN O-7914-4268-3 Contents: Acknowledgments Introduction l/Historical background 2/Dialectical prelimi- naries 3/The theory of bias 4/indicators of bias in argumentation S/Biased language 6/Argu- ments in sales and advertising II/Testing allegations of bias 8/Bias in legal and scientific arguments S/The witch hunt as a structure of argumentation lo/Extending the theory Bibliog- raphy Index 892 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841394 This book treats the notion of bias, and defines it as one-sided advocacy of a point of view in argumentation. It is argued to be harmful, or properly subject to critical condemnation, only when the dialogue exchange is supposed to be a balanced, two-sided exchange of view- points. Glenys WATERS Local Literacies Theory and Practice Dallas: Summer Institute of Linguistics, 1998 xii + 425~~. ISBN l-55671-038-0 Contents: Preface Acknowledgements l/How Learning Takes Place 2/The Learning Context 3/Phuming a Literacy Programme 4/Reading S/Reading Readiness 6/Principles of Primer Construction ‚?/Phonics, Syllable, Word, and Sentence Approaches g/Whole Language Approaches 9/integrated Approaches lO/Assessment of a Literacy Programme ll/Materials Production 12fTeaching Writing 13Mathematics 14/What Is Literacy? References Index This book offers a practical guide on how to plan and carry out a community literacy project. It gives guidance in tackling the additional barriers of language, culture, and logistics in developing countries and in treating the local community as an active partner rather than a passive recipient in the literacy process. Gert WEBELHUTH /Jean-Pierre KOENIG / Andreas KATHOL (eds.) Lexical and Constructional Aspects of Linguistic Explanation (Studies in Constraint-Based Lexicalism) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 ix + 401~~. E42.50 $64.95 (hardback) ISBN 1 575 86153 4 f15.95 $24.95 (paperback) ISBN 1 575 86152 6 Contents: Contributors l/Introduction (Gert Webelhuth, Jean-Pierre Koenig, and Andreas Kathol) I Lexical Argument Structure 2/Kinds of Objecthood in Chamorro Grammar (Michael Dukes) 3/A Composition Approach to Modem Greek ‚Weak Form™ Possessives (Din&a Kolliakou) 4/West Greenlandic Noun Incorporation in a Monohierarchical Theory of Grammar (Robert Malouf) 5/Dissociations Between ARG-ST and Grammatical Relations (Christopher D. Manning and Ivan A. Sag) II Lexical and Syntactic Constructions 6/A Lexical Approach to Quantifier Floating in French (Anne Abeille and Daniele Godard) 7/Ger- man Pied-Piped Infinitives (Kordula De Kuthy) g/Inversion and Constructional Inheritance (Charles J. Fillmore) 9/German Partial-VP Topicalization Revisited (Walt Detmar Meurers) lo/English Number Names in HPSG (Jeffrey D. Smith) III Binding Theory ll/Long-Dis- tance Reflexives and the Binding Square of Opposition (Antonio Branco and Palmira Mar- rafa) 12/HPSG, GB, and the Balinese Bind (Stephen Wechsler) IV Case and Agreement 13/Peripheral Constructions and Core Phenomena (Emily Bender and Dan FYickinger) 14/Lotus Agreement in American Sign Language (Kearsy Cormier, Stephen Wechsler, and Richard P. Meier) 15/0n Case Assignment and ‚Adjuncts as Complements™ (Adam Przepi6rkowski) V Formal and Computational Issues 16me Importance of Being Lazy (Thilo G&z and Walt Detmar Meurers) 17/inside-Out Constraints and Description Languages for HPSG (Jean-Pierre Koenig) 18/Strong Generative Capacity in HPSG (Carl J. Pollard) 19/Off-line Constraint Propagation for Efficient HPSG Processing (Walt Detmar Meurers and Guido Minnen) VI Semantics and Pragmatics 20/Conjunctive Semantics for Semantically Transparent Adverbials (David P. Baxter) 21/Antecedent Contained Ellipsis in HPSG (Howard Gregory and Shalom Lappin) 22/The Scope-Marking Construction in German (Andreas Kathol) 23/Lexicalization of Context (Graham Wilcock) Name Index Subject Index Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 893 This anthology draws together linguists, logicians, and computer scientists working on Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar and Construction Grammar. Topics that are dis- cussed include: argument structure, idiomatic constructions, case and agreement, anaphora and ellipsis, syntactic locality and non-locality, quantification, word structure, issues in pro- cessing and formalization, and unbounded dependencies. Anna WIERZBICKA Emotions across Languages and Cultures Diversity and Universals Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 xi + 349~~. f37.50 $59.95 (hardback) ISBN 0 521 59042 6 f13.95 $22.95 (paperback) ISBN 0 521 59971 7 Contents: List of figures Acknowledgments List of abbreviations l/Introduction: Feelings, languages, and cultures 2/Defining emotion concepts: discovering ‚cognitive scenarios™ 3/A case study of emotion in culture: German Angst 4/Reading human faces S/Russian emotional expression 6/Comparing emotional norms across languages and cultures: Polish vs. Anglo- American 7/Emotional universals Notes References Index This book deals with the psychological, anthropological and linguistic insights that bear on our understanding of the way emotions are expressed and experienced in different cultures, languages and culturally shaped social relations. Ronnie B. WILBUR (ed.) Sign Language and Linguistics Volume 1, number 2 1998 Amsterdam: Benjamins and HAG, 1998 115-215~~. NLG220.00 $110.00 / NLG96.00 $48.00 individual ISSN 1316-7249 Contents: Editor™s notepad Articles l/PAH! The Acquisition of Adverbials in ASL (Diane E. Anderson and Judy S. Reilly) 2/Linguistic aspects of metaphorical expressions of anger in ASL (Donald A. Grushkin) 3/Papers from the Sign Linguistics Underground (Editor™s pref- ace) 4/0n the Temporal Segmentation of Movement in American Sign Language (Don Newkirk) Researcher™s Resources S/The International Bibliography of Sign Language (Guido Joachim) Announcement James M. WILCE Eloquence in Trouble The Poetics and Politics of Complaint in Rural Bangladesh (Oxford Studies in Anthropological Linguistics 21) Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999 xix + 300~~. g47.00 ISB 0 19 5106873 Contents: Transcription Conventions Cast of Key Characters Presented 1Rroubling Our- selves with Bangla Troubles Talk 2/Listening in Matlab: Where Troubles Talk Led Me 3/Signs and Selfhood 4/Personhood: The ‚I™ in the Complaint S/Self and Indexicals: Lan- guage and Locus of Control 6/Learning to Tell Troubles: Socialization of Crying and Trou- bles Telling 7/icons and Icon Indexes: Complaint Practices and Local Views S/Troubles Talk and Social Conflict 9/interacting with Practitioners lO/Metacomplaints: Conflict, Resistance, and Metacommunication ll/rhe Pragmatics of Madness: Performance and Resistance 12/Legitimacy, Illegitimacy, and Madness in Bangladesh 13roubles Talk and Its Troubling (and Troubled) Eloquence Appendix: Transcribing Matlab Speech Notes References Index and Glossary 894 Survey of books I Lingua 111 (2001) 841-894 This book is a socio-linguistic analysis of ‚trouble-talk™ in Bangladesh. It is based for a great deal on an analysis of taped conversations. Stephen WILSON Coverbs and Complex Predicates in Wagiman (Stanford Monographs in Linguistics) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999 x + 179~~. E35.00 $49.95 (hardback) ISBN 1 575 86173 9 E12.95 $18.95 (paperback) ISBN 1 575 86172 0 Contents: Acknowledgements l/Introduction 2/Same essential features of Wagiman mor- pho-syntax 3/Coverbs as a word class 4/Coverb constructions S/The semantics and arguments of complex predicates 6/A formal approach to complex predicates 7/Conclusion Appendix l-2 Bibliography This book provides a descriptive and analytical account of the behavior of coverbs in Wagiman, an Australian Aboriginal language. Coverbs are an open class of words which are mostly involved in complex predicate formation. The analysis is formulated within the Lexi- cal Functional Grammar framework. Ruth WODAK / Rudolf de CILLIA / Martin REISIGL / Karin LIEBHART The Discursive Construction of National Identity Translated by Angelika Hirsch and Richard Mitten (Critical Discourse Analysis Series) Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1999 x + 224~~. E18.95 ISBN 0 7486 1080 4 Contents: Series Preface Acknowledgements l/Introduction 2/Ihe Discursive Construction of National Identity 3/0n Austrian Identity: The Scholarly Literature 4/The Public Arena: Commemorative Speeches and Addresses S/Semi-Public Discussions: The Focus Group Interviews 6/SemiPrivate Opinions: The Qualitative Interviews 7/Conclusion: Imagined and Real Identities - the Multiple Faces of the homo nationalis Appendix: Speeches Studied in Chapter 4 Bibliography Index In the tradition of critical discourse analysis, this book develops a method of description and analysis of national identity. The primary object of study is Austrian national identity, but the theory can be applied to other Western European states. The book analyses the rhetorical promotion of national identification and the linguistic construction and reproduction of national difference in public, semi-public and semi-private levels within a nation state. 