ELSEVIER Lingua 112 (2002) l-6 www.elsevier.com/locate/lingua Lingua Franca Grow your own linguistics? On some applied linguists™ views of the subject* Robert D. Borsleyﬂ,*, Richard Inghamb I™ Department of Language and Linguistic~s. University qf Essex. Wivenhoe Park. Colc,hester- CO4 3SQ, UK h University of Reading, UK Received IS October 2000: revised version 8 November 2000 It is a well known fact that applied linguistics at least in Britain has had little con- tact with mainstream theoretical linguistics in recent years. This presumably reflects a widespread belief among applied linguists that theoretical linguistics is largely irrelevant to applied concerns. Theoretical linguists might wish to dispute this view. It seems, however, that some applied linguists wish to go further. In recent years, a number of applied linguists have argued that mainstream theoretical linguistics is fundamentally unsatisfactory and misguided and have gone on to argue that applied linguistics can and should develop its own theories of language. Thus, Fairclough speaks of the need for ﬁthe development of a new social theory of language which may include a new grammatical theoryﬂ (1995: 10). Similarly, Kress remarks that ﬁ[i]n very many ways, it is here, in our work in Applied Linguistics that a new the- ory of language is being producedﬂ (1993 : 5), and adds that ﬁI am certain that by the Lingua is introducing a series of provocative articles under the general heading of Lingua Franca. We invite essays of about 2000 words on a favourite topic. voicing strong opinions supported by arguments in an entertaining way. Obvious examples of the genre include Geoff Pullurn™s Topic/Comment contri- butions to Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, and Neil Smith™s and Elan Dresher™s columns for Glot International. We anticipate and welcome replies, also limited to about 2000 words, to which the original contributor would have the right of reply. Where someone is an obvious target of a particular contribution, he or she will be sent a copy and invited to respond, probably in the same issue of the journal. Other responses are welcome, provided new points are being made, and will be published on an ongoing basis. The editors retain the right to decide on publication, to edit exchanges, and to close off the discussion. The first example appears in this issue, accompanied by a reply, * Corresponding author. E-mail: rborsley@essex.ac.uk 0378-2166/02/$ - see front matter 0 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-384 I(01 )00034- 1 2 R.D. Borsley, R. &ham I Lingua 112 (2002) I4 end of this century we will have produced more than the outlines of a theory ad- equate to our present tasksﬂ (1993: 22). Thus, applied linguistics is seen not as com- plementing theoretical linguistics but as an alternative, more satisfactory approach to language. We think this is quite important. It matters for linguistics how it is per- ceived by various outsiders and if people who one might perhaps expect to be apply- ing mainstream work argue that it is fundamentally misguided that can™t help. In this note, we want to take a necessarily brief look at this critique. What do some applied linguists find unsatisfactory in mainstream linguistics? And what would they like to replace it with? Mainstream work is mainly concerned with I-language, the cognitive system underlying the ordinary use of language. Various applied linguists have suggested that this is unsatisfactory and that texts are a more appropriate object of study. What is wrong with the concern with I-language? We are not aware of any careful discussion of this matter within applied work, but there are various remarks that embody objections of one kind or another. For example, Graddol (1993) criticizes ‚structuralists™, among whom he includes generative linguists, in the following passage: ﬁIn an attempt to discover a language which is analysable and codifiable, structuralists have imagined that under the messiness of real life experience lies an ideal form. Such idealizations rest on the assump- tion that context and social processes are of marginal interest . ..ﬂ (1993a: 12) It appears that Graddol thinks that it is a mistake to look for ideal forms ﬁunder the messiness of real life experienceﬂ. But this is normal scientific practice. Thus, the philosopher of science Roy Bhaskar writes that ﬁthe objects of knowledgeﬂ are ﬁthe structures and mechanisms that generate phenomenaﬂ (Bhaskar, 1975 : 25). The suggestion that structuralist idealizations ﬁrest on the assumption that context and social processes are of marginal interestﬂ is also a very strange one. To justify focusing on certain phenomena and setting others aside all one needs to argue is that the phenomena one is focusing on form a natural class. There is no need to argue that the phenomena set aside are of marginal interest. A phonetician does not have to claim that syntax is of marginal interest, she just has to claim that phonetic phenom- ena are a natural class. Similarly, a student of English literature does not have to claim that French, German, Spanish, etc. literature is of marginal interest, and a stu- dent of 19th century history does not have to claim that all other centuries are of marginal interest, and so on. Kress (1993) also appears to think that the standard notion of I-language is prob- lematic. After considering the quite different ways in which a particular story is pre- sented in two different newspapers, he remarks that: ﬁ the hitherto accepted model of the autonomous, homogeneous linguistic system, with its core of syn- tax and phonology, can no longer be sustained.ﬂ (1993: 13) Why Kress thinks his conclusion follows from his observations is unclear. We can only speculate that he is under the impression that mainstream linguists believe that all members of a speech community have the same I-language and use it in the same way, but of course no one believes this. The reference to a ‚homogeneous™ system is R.D. Borsley, R. lngham I Lingua 112 (2002) I4i 3 also puzzling since mainstream linguists generally see the linguistic system as mod- ular, hence non-homogeneous. Instead of a focus on I-language a number of applied linguists advocate a concern with ‚texts™. Stubbs, for example, asserts that ﬁ[tlhe unit of study must be whole textsﬂ (1996: 32). Similarly, Graddol advocates a ﬁpostmodem model of languageﬂ and remarks that ﬁ[plostmodem theories are concerned pre-eminently with texts, with how texts are produced, and how texts are used and situated within other cul- tural practicesﬂ (1993: 18). In similar vein, Kress suggests that ﬁa set of questions central in any approach to languageﬂ are ﬁHow do texts arise? How do they come into being? How and why do they get produced? Why in short do people talk and write?ﬂ (1989: 4), and criticizes mainstream work because it cannot provide ﬁany revealing account of the production of textﬂ (1993: 6). Thus, the suggestion is that linguistics should study texts and especially how they are produced. Stubbs defines a text as ﬁan instance of language in use, either spoken or written: a piece of language behaviour which has occurred naturally, without the intervention of the linguistﬂ (1996: 4). On this definition, texts will include the American Declaration of Independence, Hamlet, an episode of Eastenders, the words on a tombstone or a beer mat, an advert for soap powder, what we said to each other yesterday, etc., etc. The idea that some discipline should have as its object of study the production of such diverse things is very odd. There are, of course, people who are concerned with some of these things. Thus, there are political historians who are interested in the production of the American Declaration of Independence and similar documents and literary historians who are interested in the production of Hamlet and other literary works. Are we to believe that some kind of linguist could do a better job? Surely not. It would be much more plausible to propose that linguistics is concerned with the linguistic properties of texts. This would mean properties like involving a simple vocabulary, containing a large number of passives, or containing many discourse connectives, but not properties like being interesting, being libellous, or being avail- able from all good bookshops. There are in fact various reasons for studying the lin- guistic properties of texts. In the case of spoken texts, one might learn something about the production mechanisms. If some sentence type occurs very rarely in natu- rally occurring speech that may be significant. A study of texts might also establish a number of text types with distinctive properties. This would be of interest because it raises a question about speakers™ knowledge of text types. Is this a part of the I- language (Hudson, 1996; Paolillo, 2000) or part of a separate ‚user™s manual™ (Culy, 1996). Thus, the idea that linguistics should study the linguistic properties of texts is a reasonable one. Clearly, however, it presupposes some understanding of the lin- guistic properties, but this is what the study of I-language seeks to provide. Thus, far from being an alternative to the study of I-language this kind of research presup- poses its existence. A second important feature of mainstream linguistics is a reliance on native speakers™ intuitions as a major source of data. Various applied linguists think this is unsatisfactory, and suggest that corpora of naturally occurring speech and writing are a more satisfactory source of data. 4 R.D. Borsley, R. Ingham I Lingrta 112 (2002) 14 Stubbs is particularly outspoken here, but what he has to say has been said before by various people. He remarks that ﬁa linguist™s introspections are private and not open to criticism by othersﬂ (1996: 45). However, it is simply not true that intro- spections are not open to criticism by others. As Chomsky emphasized a long time ago : ﬁIt is not that these introspective judgements are sacrosanct and beyond any conceivable doubt. On the contrary, their correctness can be challenged in various ways, some quite indirect. Consistency among speakers of similar backgrounds, and consistency for a particular speaker on different occasions is relevant information. The possibility of constructing a systematic and general theory to account for these observations is also a factor to be considered in evaluating the probable correctness of particular obser- vations.ﬂ (I 964: 79-80) Stubbs also criticizes the use of intuitions on the grounds that ﬁ[nlormally one expects a scientist to develop theories to describe and explain some phenomena which already exist, independently of the scientistﬂ (1996: 29). Stubbs has appar- ently forgotten the role of experiments in science. Scientists conduct experiments precisely because the ﬁphenomena which already exist, independently of the scien- tistﬂ are uninformative and do not allow them to evaluate their theories. As has often been pointed out (e.g. Chomsky, 1986: 36; Jackendoff, 1993: 46-49), investigations of intuitions are informal experiments. It would be as odd for linguists to avoid such informal experiments as it would be for physicists to avoid their much more sophis- ticated experiments. One might argue here that more use should be made of more formal experiments. In fact a number of researchers have argued for this position, e.g. Bard et al. (1996), Cowart (1997). However, this is quite different from reject- ing any use of intuitions. A further criticism comes from Graddol et al., who remark that ﬁ[tlhe embarrass- ing fact is that native speaker intuitions about ‚acceptability™ or ‚grammaticality™ are not infallibleﬂ (1994: 19). It is not clear why they think there is something embar- rassing here. Would they say that it is embarrassing that experiments in psychology or physics are not infallible? Presumably not. None of these things are embarrassing. ?‚hey are simply a reflection of the fact that scientific research is hard and that there is no infallible method that one can employ. As Bhaskar (1975: 168) remarks, ﬁ[slcience is work that requires creative intelligence, and there can be no mechani- cal surrogate for thatﬂ. As we have indicated, Stubbs, Graddol and others see a corpus of speech or writing as a better source of data than intuitions. There are various problems here. One is that a corpus is only as useful as one™s ability to search it. There is no prob- lem if one is just interested in lexical statistics, but mainstream linguists are gener- ally interested in much more abstract matters. One might, for example, want to know whether some language allows parasitic gaps within subjects, in other words, whether it allows sentences like She is the kind of person that friends of would do anything for, where there is a parasitic gap following of and an ordinary gap follow- ing for. There is no mechanical way to search for sentences like this. Hence, one would have to do it by hand. This looks like a good way to waste time. It would clearly be more sensible to ask native speakers. R.D. Borsley, R. Ingham I Lingua 112 (2002j l-4 5 Another problem with a corpus is that it is difficult to conclude anything from the fact that some type of example does not appear in it. This might mean that such examples are ungrammatical but it might not. This is especially true when the kinds of example one is interested in involve complex syntactic properties. Suppose, for example, that one wants to know whether some language allows the topicalization of a reflexive pronoun, in other words whether it allows examples like Himself, Kim most admires. If one does not find a relevant example in a million words of text, can one conclude anything? One might conclude something if there was some reason to think that such examples would appear in a million words of text if they were gram- matical, but as far as we know, there is no reason to think this. A final problem concerns meaning. A corpus is just a collection of sounds or marks on a surface or an electronically stored version of these. In themselves the sounds or marks have no meanings. They are endowed with meanings by native speakers. Hence the only way to find out about meanings is to ask native speakers. Anyone who doubts this should try analyzing a corpus of speech or writing from a language that they do not know without the help of a native speaker. Surprisingly, those who object to the use of intuitions are quite happy to make statements about meaning which could only derive from intuitions. Thus, Stubbs, for example, says a great deal about meaning, discussing inter alia presupposition, modality, and illocu- tionary force. Perhaps, the critics assume that intuitions about meaning are funda- mentally different from intuitions about grammaticality. As far as we are aware, however, no one has actually argued for this position, and it seems to us that it would be very difficult to do so. It seems to us, then, that applied linguists who advocate reliance on a corpus have failed to appreciate the limitations of such a methodology. Of course, none of this implies that corpora cannot be useful. In fact there is increasing use of corpus data in various areas of mainstream linguistics. Moreover, there is obviously no alterna- tive to corpus data if the speakers are dead. Hence, mainstream work on dead lan- guages is inevitably based on a corpus (supplemented by intelligent guesses about meanings). Corpus data is also central in work on the early stages of child language acquisition. However, when intuitions are available they are an invaluable source of data. The issues that we have been concerned here deserve a more extended discussion. It seems to us, however, that the applied linguists that we have looked at have neither a serious critique of mainstream linguistics nor a coherent alternative. In the circumstances, the idea that applied linguistics represents an alternative, more satis- factory approach to language cannot be taken very seriously. References Bard, E.G., D. Robertson and A. Sorace, 1996. Magnitude estimation of linguistic acceptability. Lan- guage 72( l), 32-68. Bhaskar, R., 1975. A realist theory of science. Leeds, Leeds Books. Chomsky, N.A., 1964. Current issues in linguistic theory. Mouton, The Hague. Chomsky, N.A., 1986. Knowledge of language. New York: Praeger. 6 R.D. Borsley, R. @ham I Lingua 112 (2002) 14 Cowart, W., 1997. Experimental syntax: Applying objective methods to sentence judgements. London: Sage Publications. Culy, C., 1996. Null objects in English recipes. Language Variation and Change 8, 91-124. Fairclough, N., 1995. Critical discourse analysis. Second edition. London: Routledge. Graddol, D., 1993. Three models of language description. In: D. Graddol and Boyd-Barrett (eds.), Media texts: Authors and readers, 1-21. Buckingham: Open University Press. Graddol, D., J. Cheshire and J. Swann, 1994. Describing language. Second edition. Buckingham: Open University Press. Hudson, R.A., 1996. Sociolinguistics. Second edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Jackendoff, R., 1993. Patterns in the mind: London: Harvester Wheatsheaf. Kress, G., 1989. Linguistic processes in sociocultural practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Kress, G., 1993. Cultural considerations in linguistic description. In: D. Graddol and D.L. Thompson (eds.), Language and culture, l-22. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. Paolillo, J.C., 2000. Formalizing formality: An analysis of register variation in Sinhala. Journal of Lin- guistics 36, 215-259. Stubbs, M., 1996. Text and corpus analysis: Computer-assisted studies of language and culture. Oxford: Blackwell. 