HSEVIEK Lingua 112 (2002) F-78 www.elsevier.com/locate/lineua Book review c Review of Alain Rouveret, ed., &r et trvoir: sy~tavr. serwntique, typolngie, Presses Universitaires de Vincennes, Universite de Paris VIII, 1998*. Reviewed by: Jacqueline Gutron, Universite de Paris III-Sorbonne Nouvelle. 1. Introduction ﬁEtre et avoirﬂ is an extremely stimulating book. It contains eight analyses of the verb &e by generative and generativist-compatible European linguists working on Latin, Portuguese, Italian, English, Comorian, Georgian and Hebrew. Each article contibutes new empirical data and a new, well-argued, often provocative hypothesis to account for the data in the framework of Universal Grammar. In addition, Alain Rouveret provides a superb introductory chapter. His concise yet complete account of the relevant twentieth-century literature allows the special- ist to review and the beginner to learn the major issues raised by the grammar of the verb BE. I also found Rouveret™s elegant, somewhat formal, French style a refresh- ing contrast to the generally colorless English of the typical generativist article. The advantage of choosing a single theme, here essentially the verb BE, is that the same theoretical hypotheses can be tested with respect to different language families, in this book the Romance, Caucasian, Bantu, and Semitic families. It is a pity there is nothing on German or Dutch, which unlike English, but like Latin, Italian and Por- tuguese, have two verbs BE, yet belongs to a non-Romance language family. Certain hypotheses due to Benveniste, Couquaux and Stowell, and Moro recur throughout the book. 1.l. In ﬁ&e et mvir dans leurs fonctions linguistiquesﬂ, Benveniste (1966, p. 197) formulated, with respect to examples like ( 1) and (2), the now-famous observation: ﬁu\vir n™est rien d™autre qu™un Btw d inverseﬂ (avoir is nothing but an inverted B!r.e d). incompletely published in Lingua I I 1 (2001) I3 I-l 55. PII of original article SO0243841 (00)0002 I - 8. * E-mail: pueron@ext.jussieu.fr 0378-2 166/OI/$ - see front matter 0 200 I Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved PII: SO024383 I(0 I )00033-X 54 (1) (2) 1.2 mihi est liber I I DAT NOM to me is book (i.e. I have a book) pro habeo librum I I NOM ACC I have a book Benveniste also noted the fundamental grammatical affinity in certain languages between expressions of possession and perfect structures, as in Classical Armenian (3)-(4). (3) nora tun e (p. 201) his-GEN house is (he has a house) (4) nora teseal e his-GEN seen is (he has seen) In this book, both Montaut and Mahajan point out that in Hindi, possessive struc- tures like (3) and perfect structures like (4) manifest the typological properties of ergativity: the subject has oblique case while the syntactic patient has nominative case. And typically, the language lacks the verb avoir. 1.3. Couquaux (1981) and Stowell (198 1) independently proposed that BE is a rais- ing verb. It selects a small clause (SC) of the form [NP XP] lacking verb and tense morphemes. A canonical predicational copula sentence is derived by raising the sub- ject of the small clause to the matrix subject position. (5) a. e T BE [,, John my best friend] b. John, T BE [,, t, my best friend] c. John is my best friend. 2. Moro ( 1988, 199 1) proposed that imwse copula sentences like (6b) are derived by raising the prdicare rather than the sr4hject of the small clause in (Sa). (6) a. My best friend, T BE [John t,] b. My best friend is John. In the next section, we summarize and comment on the articles in the book. We then conclude with an overwhelmingly positive appraisal and one or two regrets. 2. The articles Following a brief ‚Prisentation™, Rouveret™s preliminary sur le verbe r^h-r™, provides theoretical background. 55 chapter, ‚Points de vue The basic problem for the analysis of l?TRE is how to account for the fact that the same syntactic structure containing the verb BE is open to a variety of in- terpretations, in particular to the p~rdiccrri\~e interpretation (7) and the i&n&y in- terpretation (8). (7) a. b. (8) a. b. Le livre est sur 1™Ctagkre. The book is on the shelf Bruno est professeur. Bruno is (a) teacher Le meilleur ami d™Hamlet est Horatio. The best friend of Hamlet is Horatio. L™Ctoile du matin est V&us. The morning star is Venus. Rouveret summarizes the contributions of the major linguists who have addressed this and related problems. Meillet ( 1934) raised the question whether the copula was a true predicate (in cur- rent terms, a lexical morpheme), or simply an ‚accessory™ to the predicate (i.e. a functional morpheme). In addition to analyzing ul~b- as an inverted &r pi, Benveniste (19.52, 1966) pro- posed that both the Armenian perfect WIU gal-cecrl I? (genitive-his done is, he had done) and Latin WWO f~4cr14n1 (‚I have done™) are structurally reiated to the simple possessive form in the languages. Benveniste also distinguished structures expressing ‚possession™, where the pos- sessor is marked DATIVE and the possessed object is necessarily indefinite, as in Latin ﬁest patri meo domusﬂ (is to my father house - My father has a house), from those expressing ﬁappartenanceﬂ (belonging), where the possessed object is (+defi- nite] and the GENITIVE possessor is part of the predicate: : ﬁhaec domus patris mei estﬂ (this house is my father™s). Freeze ( 1992) and Kayne ( 1993) interpreted Benveniste™s statement about clvoir as an inverted ?tw ci as a syntactic program. Freeze ( 1992) proposed that the abstract locative P of a belong-type sentence incorporates in syntax to he, deriving uvoir (with the object of P raising to subject position). (9) a. e ETRE LXP DP,,,,,,,, P DPI a book P John 1 i_ _~~_~~__~~ J I 56 Book review) I Lingua 112 (2002) 53-78 b. DP P+ETRE DPlhCIIIC i i I I /I I John has a book For Kayne P is the head of a DP/CP complement of copula BE. Under certain conditions P raises to and merges with BE, again deriving HAVE. (10) e ETRE hIcp D/P Lgr,l D%,, Agr QP/Nh,,,,J 44 I I a book John, + etre t,, I ™ i ™ John has a book Both authors treat P as a syntactic head which functions as an applicative mor- pheme when merged with BE. However, such syntactic ‚downgrading™ within a derivation may be considered a violation of inclz4sivrness (Chomsky, 1998). The change from lexical head to functional morpheme is a typical example of the g~rn- ntaticalizztion process which identifies a transition from one stage of grammar to another. As a diachronic change, the shift from head to applicative morpheme requires only a relabelling of the categorial feature of P in the lexicon. But within a derivation the same change requires either pruning a labelled node, the PP or CP which P projects in (9) and (lo), or else the creation of an incoherent chain linking an applicative morpheme to a syntactic head. Alternatively, P in (9) and (10) may be syntactically underdetermined, its [+loc] feature construed in LF as a syntactic head in situ and as an applicative morpheme under merger. But this alternative erases the distinction between features and cat- egories. If a (+loc] F may be construed as either a syntactic head or a bound mor- pheme, what prevents other FFs such as gender, lexical class, [+/-definite], [+/-hon- orific] or ]+/-humanJ from projecting syntactic categories as well? Such a powerful mechanism needs independent arguments in its favor. Benveniste also discussed the use of Btl-r as both copula and stative verb of existence. The two construals may be associated with the same verb, like French &e, or with two different verbs, such as Irish copula is vs existence verb to. Both Benveniste and Hjelmslev (1948) raised the issue of predicative vs identifi- cational BE. Higgins (1973) later identified four rather than two construals of BE based on the referential status of the pre- and post- verbal nominal. (11) 1 Pwdimtioml: a. Pierre est intelligent Pierre is intelligent b. Horatio est le meilleur ami d™Hamlet Horatio is Hamlet™s best friend II Idcnt~~cational: Cet homme est Alfred0 Funoll This man is A.F. 111 Specifcatianal: Le meilleur ami d™Hamlet est Horatio Hamlet™s best friend is Horatio. IV Identity: L™etoile du soir est l™etoile de matin The evening star is the morning star Rouveret goes on to define some terms introduced by the modern semantic lit:ra- ture on BE: (i) strmg vs ~wzk interpretations of pronouns and determiners (Milsark, 1977) (ii) stage level vs indir™idztal level predicates (Carlson, 1977) (iii) sprci™ing or localising predicates vs all other predicates. (ii) and (iii) combined account for contrasts such as (12a) vs ( 12b). In order for an indefinite NP to be subject of a predication. not only must the predicate be stage- level, it must also be ‚specifying™ (Kleiber, 1981) or ‚localising™ (Dobrovie-Sorin, 1997). ( 12) a. * Du beurre etait breton. * Butter was from Brittany. b. Du beurre Ctait en train de fondre sur la table. Butter was melting on the table (iv) thetic vs cvrtrgoric judgements (Kuroda 197 2, 1995). In the categoric~ sen- tence (13a), a predicate applies to an argument whose existence is presupposed. In the thetic sentence ( 13b), the existence of the corresponding nominal is not presup- posed but asserted. ( 13) a. Jean Ctait intelligent/malade John was intelligent/sick b. I1 y a des enfants dans la corn There are children in the yard. Finally, Rouveret turns to the standard syntactic analysis of BE as an unaccusative raising verb selecting a small clause [NP XP], and Moro™s proposal that inverse cop- ula sentences are derived by raising the SC predicate as in (14b) rather than the SC sub.ject as in (14a). (14) a. John is ]t my best friend] b. My best friend is [John t] The ungrammaticality of (15b) constitutes a problem for Moro™s hypothesis. (15) a. John is a doctor. b. <™ A doctor is John. Rouveret here refers to GuCron (1994a) who attributes the contrast between ( 14b) and (15b) to the Functional Definition of Categories (Gueron and Hoekstra, 1988): a nominal is construed at LF as an argument if it is cusr tmrked but as a predicate if it is T-murked (i.e. governed by Tense or by a T-marked auxiliary). A nominal SC predicate which raises to subject position is not T-marked at the level of interpreta- tion. It must therefore be construable as one of the semantic types which normally occupy subject position. With copular verbs, the raised predicate must be constru- able as a quantifying expression which picks out an element from a set of elements. This semantic condition is satisfied in (14b), which implies a set of friends, but not in (15b).™ Rouveret points out that sentences like (15b) are grammatical in Welsh and in Hebrew, and attributes the contrast in grammaticality to different landing sites: while the predicate nominal raises to Spec IP in English and French, it raises to the less constrained Spec CP position in Welsh and Hebrew. If Moro™s raising hypothesis is correct, all BE sentences contain an underlying small clause of the form [NP XP]. Higgins™ identificational BE, class II, and specifi- cational BE, class III, then reduce to the inverse copula structure. Do Higgin™s identity sentences, class IV, also reduce to the inverse copula? Rouveret cites Heycock and Kroch ( 1996), who claim, on the basis of examples like (16), that identity sentences, with both nominal5 referential, allowing inversion of subject and predicate, constitute a primitive sentence type. (16) a. Leon Bronstein est Trotsky. b. Your opinion of Edinburgh is my opinion of Philadelphia. Such sentences do not have the properties of predications. Whereas a predicate can be pronominalised by Ir in French (ﬁJean l™est, mon meilleur amiﬂ - John is it, my best friend), the post-verbal nominal in (16) cannot (ﬁ* Leon Bronstein l™est, Trotskyﬂ). Identity sentences have rather the properties of inverse copulas: nothing can be extracted from the second nominal. And they cannot be embedded (cf. (17)). (17) a. * I consider [my only friend my dog]. b. * I consider [your opinion of Edinburgh my opinion of Philadelphia]. Heycock and Kroch argue that since identity sentences exist independently, the simplest grammar would classify the inverse copula and similar specificational sen- tences as identity structures, rather than derive them by predicate raising. It is not certain, however, that identity sentences exist at the level of sentence grammar. Many sentences which look like identity statements fail the test of reversibility of nominals. Sentences ( 18a) and ( 18b) below are both strictly speaking ™ Compare (15b) (= (i)) with grammatical (ii) (Heycock, PK.) (i) * A good doctor is John. (ii) ONE good doctor is John. grammatical, but they do not have the same truth value: while (18a) is true, (18b) is false unless more information is added. (18) a. 2 + 2 is 4 b. 4 is 2 + 2 (or 3 + 1 or 4 + 0). Nor do the sentences in ( 19) have the same interpretation. For this reader, at least, (19a) is a canonical sentence and (19b) an inverse sentence. Note that (19a) may be followed by ﬁThat it isﬂ, the equivalent of Ruwet™s ﬁII l™estﬂ cited above, indicating a predication, while (19b) may not be under the most natural, i.e. inverse. interpreta- tion and stress pattern. ( 19) a. Your opinion of Edinborough is my opinion of Philadelphia. b. My opinion of Philadelphia is your opinion of Edinborough. (19a) is comparable to (20a-b), in which the subject functions as what Fauconnier (1992) calls a t,alue (individual evaluated in the discourse world) and the object functions as a r.ole (individual evaluated in a world dependent on the real world). (20) a. Leon Bronstein is (plays the role of) Trotsky (in the political arena) b. Richard Burton is (plays the role of) Caesar (in this movie). (21) a. Trotsky is (* plays the role of) Leon Bronstein. b. Julius Caesar is (* plays the role of) Richard Burton. Suppose identity sentences do exist, on some level of grammar.™ Rouveret™s dis- cussion of predicate raising to CP in Welsh and Heycock™s discussion of predicate- fronting in English below show that raising a predicate to Spec-CP is independently motivated in the grammar. If so, what could possibly prevent a predicate which hap- pened to be nominal from raising to Spec IP rather than Spec CP, to satisfy the EPP F of T? If nothing prevents it, then the inverse copula can be derived by predicate raising independently of the existence of identity structures. 2 (i) (ii) (ii) (iii) (iv) is a true identity sentence. with freely inverted nominals (Ora Matushansky, p.C.). My neighbor, whom 1 don™t know personally. is the winner. who walked away with 3000 dol- larh. The winner. who walked away with 300 dollars, is my neighbor, whom I don™t know personally. Without two non-restrictive clauses. we return to asymmetric predicative (iii) and inverse (iv) sentences. My neighbor, whom 1 don™t know personally, is the winner. (canonical) The winner is my neighbor, whom I don™t know personally. (inverse) In (iv), nq neighhw is the focus constituent which identifies an individual defined by the ‚winner™ property. But in (ii) there is no such slot-filler relation: each individual is identified separately with a discourse entity. These data suggest that identity sentences may not belong to sentence grammar but to discourse gram mar. On this level, a non-restrictive relative merged with a DP renders the latter referential, over-riding the status otherwise assigned by sentence grammar. 60 Book review, I Lingua 112 (2002 J 53-78 Rouveret recalls the ‚Mapping hypothesis™ of Diesing (1992), according to which the subject of a temporary or sruge-level predicate is located within the VP while that of a permanent or individual-level predicate is located higher in the structure. Heim (1992) proposed that a stage-level predicate defines a variable saturated by a default existential operator. Rouveret suggests that one function of BE is to support the exis- tential operator. Rouveret also refers to his (1996) analysis of BE in Welsh. Welsh has two verbs he, mae, used in expressions of existence, possession, belonging, and with stage level predicates, and hod the copula. Rouveret (1996) suggests that nlae is derived syntactically by incorporation of copula hod to a locative clitic. (22) mae = [CL,,,, + hod + Pres. 3 sg.] Existential, possessive, and predicational structures in Welsh require both mue and an independent locative element. Rouveret proposes that the locative mor- phemes, yn or gando, in structures (23)-(26) in Welsh (similarly for Irish and Scotch Gaelic) correspond to the Preposition which incorporates into the copula in Romance languages, deriving avoir. (23) Mue ci mawr yn yr ardd. Is dog big in the garden. (there is a big dog in the garden) (24) Mae dyn yn siarad efo Mair Is man in (Prog.) speak with Mair. (a man is speaking with Mair) (25) a. Mae Sion yn glaf Is Sion in sick. (Sion is sick) b. Mae™r mor yn las Is sea in blue (the sea is blue) (26) Mae ganndo lyfr Is with him book (he has a book) Rouveret proposes the existence of two incorporation processes, one which adjoins the copula to a locative suffix, creating an existential verb like mar, and another which incorporates an abstract preposition into a copula, deriving avoir. In the absence of the second process, the abstract preposition remains overt and the lan- guage lacks avoir. Bernard BORTOLUSSI, ‚ESSE + Datif et ESSE + Genitif en Latin™ Bortolussi gives a negative answer, at least for Latin, to two questions raised in the introductory chapter: 61 (i) Is ‚possessive™ DAT+ESSE an inversion of ‚belong™ ESSE + GEN? (ii) Does habere correspond to esse + P? Despite the apparent synonymy of (27) and (28), their free alternation in pos- sessive contexts, and the [+ definite] and [+animate] FFs of the possessor, the two structures are not equivalent. (27) Liber patri meo est (28) Book,,,,,,, [father<,,,, to-medJ is (My father has a book/man pere a un livre) Hit liber patris mei est This book,,, ,,,, [father,,,, mei,,,,] is (This book is my father™s/ce livre est a mon p&e) As Benveniste (1966) pointed out, the possessed object is dominantly indefinite in sentences like (27) but obligatorily definite in (28). Bertolussi analyzes (28) as a predication: owning a book is a property of the definite subject, while (27) is an existential sentence: the book is localized with respect to the animate DP. Latin had both existential and copula esse. Bertolussi argues that possessive (27) contains existential, not copzrla, esse. This important point has not been made before to my knowledge. a. Existential and possessive esse, unlike copula esse, requires an indefinite pos- sessed object. b. Both existential esse and possessive esse may appear at the head of the sen- tence, while copula esse is VP final. c. With both existential and possessive esse, the possessed element is construed as focus of the sentence, but the possessor is focus with copula esse, as shown by the wh-words (=focus) in the dative and the genitive constructions. (29) (30) d. Qlrid si,qtlwn Amphitrioni est? (Pass) What sign A.,,:,, is‚? What sign is A™s‚? C~irrs est id Signum (Belong) Whose,,,, is this sign? Existential esse but not copula esse is systematically accompanied by time or space adverbials. Bortolussi proposes that the possessor in possessive constructions plays the same role as time and space adverbials in existential constructions, that of localizing the focalized nominal. ‚Our hypothesis is thus that the possessive dative functions essen- tially as one of the spatio-temporal adverbials in an existential predication™.3 Thi\ suggestion was earlier made in Lyons (1976, 198(J), ah Bertolussi points out. Bortolussi™s demonstration that possessive esse is a subcase of existential csse undermines the incorporation hypothesis according to which possessive esse and hahere both take the copula as their base. Lyons (1967) analyzed hahere as an unaccusative verb like essere which assigns no .4gent theta-role, but simply provides a way of placing the major participant of the possession relation in subject position. (Below Moro also analyzes hahrre as a copula verb.) Bortolussi points out, however, that hahere was originally a full lexical verb meaning to ‚hold™ or ‚take™, which did not require an indefinite direct object. The Definiteness Effect showed up only as hahere lost its lexical properties. (31) is thus ambiguous in Latin depending on the [+/- definite] construal of the direct object. (3 1) Hostis habet muros a. The enemy has walls. (possessive state) b. The enemy is holding (our/the) walls. (dynamic event) If hahere denoting possession is the grammaticalized form of a lexical verb mean- ing to hold or take, then deriving hahere from esse + P is redundant as well as his- torically unsupp0rted.l Bortolussi concludes that the semantic equivalence of (1) and (2) is a coincidence. The esse + dative structure is a subcase of localisation structures while the esse + genitive structure is a subcase of predication. The syntactic position of the subject determines its different semantics: the DAT DP subject of the localizing possessive predication is external to VP, while the GEN DP, as part of the predicate, is internal to VP. Caroline HEYCOCK ‚Phrases reduites inverses™ In this perspicacious article, Caroline Heycock brings new evidence and new arguments to bear on the analysis of the inverse copula. Recall that for Moro, the canonical copula sentence (32) is derived by raising the subject of a SC to matrix sub- ject position while the inverse copula sentence (33) is derived by raising of the SC predicate. (32) That phrase of music might be one of the themes [That phrase of music], might be [ti one of the themes] (33) One of the themes might be that phrase of music. [One of the themes], might be [,, that phrase of music t,i] Moro™s hypothesis offered an account for the fact that extraction of or from the SC predicate is possible in a canonical S, but impossible in an inverse S. In the second case, the trace of the SC subject is not properly governed. (34) [Which of the themes], do you think [that phrase of music, might be [ti $1. (35) * Which phrase of musici do you think [one of the themes, might be [t, t,] -I This same point is made in Gueron (1994b). Several researchers have assimilated the inverted copula to other structures derived by predicate fronting. (36) a. Also a nice woman is our next guest. b. Remaining issues are pay and transfers. Heycock shows that the claim is unfounded. For one thing, a plural NP commands singular agreement in the inverse copula construction but plural agreement in predi- cate fronting constructions. (37) a. Unwed mothers and neighborhood delinquents N/Y the cause of the problem. PREDICATION b. The cause of problem is unwed mothers and neighborhood delinquents. INV COPULA c. Also the cause of the problem are unwed mothers and neighborhood delin- quents. PREDICATE FRONTING Moroever. as Hoekstra and Mulder (1990) point out, septrr and hr> consirlerecl exclude predicate raising while allowing predicate fronting. (38) a. ‚!: The source of the problem is considered [John t]. b. Most embarrassing would have been considered [losing your keys tl. Note also that a raised predicate which is ungrammatical in the inverse copula is grammatical in a fronting structure. (39) a. * A hero is John. b. Also a hero is John. Rouveret (1996) accounts for the grammaticality of (39a) in Celtic and Semitic languages by arguing that the landing site of a raised predicate in these languages is Spec CP, not Spec IP. The grammaticality of (39b) invites a similar account of pred- icate-fronting in English. It thus appears that while Welsh and English have A™ movement of a predicate to Spec CP. English but not Welsh also has A-movement of a nominal predicate to Spec IP. It has been proposed that predicate raising crucially depends on the presence of BE to provide a landing site for the raised predicate (Moro, 199 I ) or to create a con- figuration of equidistance allowing movement over the SC subject (den Dikken, 1993). Heycock offers empirical evidence that the verb BE is not crucial to the inverse copula. For while seen1 and he cmsid~rrtl disallow the inverse copula, I-enrcrirr and h~onrr accept it. (40) a. I consider [John the culprit] b. * I consider [the culprit John] (41) a. * The best solution seems instant retreat. b. * The real problem was considered John. 64 Book review I Linguu I12 (2002) 53-78 (42) a. The best solution remains instant retreat. b. At this point our real problem becomes John. Heycock attributes the contrast between (41) and (42) to distinct subcategoriza- tion properties of the matrix verb. Seen? and consider select a simple DP SC with no F-nodes (43a), while remain and become select an ASP P (43b). (43) a. /~,_ V DP /Y I /zcz!k { cZZer > ‚I™ our real problem (43) b. VP -1 V ASPP I /------\ 1 I be ASP A remain DP 1 A become John our real problem Heycock refers to GuCron and Hoekstra (1988,92) and Gueron (1994a) according to whom only a nominal which is T-marked (governed by T or an auxiliary verb) may be construed as a predicate. In (43b), Asp, which raises to V and T, T-marks the predicate nominal, leaving it free to raise to matrix subject position. In (43a), how- ever, the predicate cannot be T-marked unless its head, D, raises to V in LF. But this movement is impossible if the predicate has raised to Spec IP in syntax. Heycock™s new data in (42) and her proposal that aspect is crucial for the gram- matical analysis of the inverse copula seems to me to be a solid result which must be incorporated in any lasting analysis of the construction. However, the assumption that a SC predicate raises to Spec IP qua predicate pre- dicts, counter to fact, the grammaticality of (44b). (44) a. John is/remains/became a hero. b. * A hero is/remains/became John. In my own analysis, as Rouveret pointed out, no nominal which raises to Spec IP can be construed as a predicate in LF, in the absence of T-marking. We may also question the existence of small clauses like (43a) of the Jespersen ~re.~s or Stowell [NP XP] type, lacking F-projections. The subject and predicate of a SC agree in number and gender, overtly in French: (‚Marie [fem.sg.] est ma meilleure amie [femsg.]‚). This agreement pattern is distinct from agreement in number and person mediated by Infl (Marie/Jean vient), and therefore cannot be attributed to long-distance agreement with T. How is agreement mediated in the SC in the absence of any F-node? Similarly, T in the matrix lnfl connects the proposi- tion to the time axis via its syntactic link to C. How is the small clause predicate placed in time if no F-node links it to the matrix T? Finally, if we take categorial selection to be a reflection of the lexical content of a predicate, then a copula, lacking lexical content, cannot select any category at all. In the absence of any relation between V and DP, (43a) is not interpretable at the interface. An alternative hypothesis is possible which retains Heycock™s proposal that aspect is essential to the inverse copula without positing bare scs or assigning selectional properties to verbs without lexical content. In this hypothesis, the raised nominal is not construed as a predicate in LF and the presence of BE, contrary to appearances, is crucial. We take remain, heconw and, optionally, hr to be complex lexical items which spell out the result of the merger of two sets of FFs, each defining a head within a verbal shell. One F set is AGR. The other is an aktionsart feature such as ﬁinchoa- tiveﬂ or ﬁdurativeﬂ chosen from a small set of such Fs in the lexicon. At LF, a syn- tactically projected aktionsart F is construed as an aspectual F within a T-chain. In (45) below, VP is dominated by an Akt/Asp projection, which links BE to Tense, and an AGR projection which mediates SC agreement. (We ignore matrix AGR.) (45) TP -\ / \ Spec ,,A T AGRP ,6 AGR AKTJASP A-l Spec AKT/ASP™ AKT,&PYﬂP ou&b]em (+inchj ]+AGR] (46a) and (46b) can both be derived from this structure. (46) a. John is/became/remains our real problem. b. Our real problem is/becomes/remains John. Let us first derive the predicative copula sentence (46a). I assume the traditional view that copula BE corresponds to a minimal V identified by Tense and Agr FFs. BE raises to the AKT/ASP head. Here it may merge with an aspectual F [+F] (the F which distinguishes estar from ser in Spanish and Portuguese), or else with [+dur] or [+inch], in which case the entire set of FFs is spelled out as remain or hecon7e. If AKT/ASP is not projected, then V functions as a copula: it raises to AGR and to T to check its FFs, which, under merger, identify the post-verbal nominal as a predicate situated at a point in time. If Akt/Asp is projected, then be is [+ F] or is spelled out as remai77 or heconre. In this case, the verbal predicate has an aspectual value which, when linked to T and C within a T-chain, places the predicate in an interval of time rather than at a point in time. Let us now derive the inverse copula sentence (46b). Suppose that it is the SC predicate rather than the SC subject which raises to Spec IP to check the EPP F of T. in the absence of T-marking in LF, this nominal cannot be construed as a predicate at the interface. However, if it happens to contains a numeral such as one, or a scalar F, as in ‚the best™, ‚the only™, etc., then the nominal can be construed as a quantifying expression or, more precisely perhaps. as a head- less relative construed as selecting an indivual from a set of individuals defined by a property. The small clause subject is construed as focus in VP-final position, plausi- bly by default. In the absence of a T-marked predicate, BE may not function as a copula. If Full Interpretation is to be satisfied at the interface, BE must somehow acquire a non- copula construal in LF which allows it to link a quantificational subject and a focussed object. We suggested above that copula BE has punctual aspect by default. BE + T link a state to a point in time. But when BE has an aspectual F, [+F], [+dur] or ]+inch], it must denote a state or process with temporal duration which can be linked to an interval of time. This requirement is satisfied in the canonical copula sentence by merger of he+F/hec~on?e/r.enlai77 with a nominal predicate. BE + predicate can denote a state or change of state existing over time. But how can aspectually extended BE denote a process or event in the inverse sentence in which it does not merge with a lexical predicate? We believe this to be the key problem for any analysis of the inverse copula which invokes the role of aspect. Our own answer is that while aspectually extended BE cannot denote a spatio- temporal event such as u~jti/r~ or heiq naugI7ty in the absence of merger with a lex- ical predicate, it can denote a purely mental event. We propose that in inverse copula (47a), identity (47b), and specificational (47c), the aspectual content of he+F/hec~on7elr_en7ain is satisfied by a construal in which the verb denotes a process situated not in space-time but in time alone. (47) a. My best friend is John. b. Trotsky is Leon Bernstein. C. What I want is a good S-cent cigar. The sentences of (47) imply a three-part reasoning processes. The first part, tar- geting the subject DP, picks out an entity defined by a numeral or a scalar property _ my best friend, the nicest man in town, one good doctor - from a set of entities possessing the property, but without identifying the entity. The second part, target- ing the focus nominal, identifies an individual but without making explicit the set from which the focus individual is extracted. The third part, targeting the verb. denotes a mental trajectory which connects the ,qcq~ in the pre-verbal definite descrip- tion with the focusfi™llrr- in post-verbal position. The pre-verbal nominal functions as the Source argument of a mental trajectory for which the post-verbal nominal is the Goal argument. A transitive event structure with durative aspect is thus compo- sitionally attained. Our proposal preserves Heycock™s insight concerning the importance of aspect in the inverse copula. But it also maintains our own hypothesis concerning the (nega- tive) role of T-marking in this structure, which is the opposite of Heycock™s, and which alone accounts for the contrast between (44b) and, say, (33b). The proposal implies the existence not of two but of three construals of BE. Along- side the copula BE of predications, containing only T and AGR FFs, and stative exis- tential BE, containing in addition a [+loc] akt F licensing locative, existential and pos- sessive construals. there also exists a dynamic aspectual BE, with an [+T] akt F in place of !he [+loc] F, which defines a mental event. Unlike eventive verbs like ~CI~P or Iloltl, or their stative version II(/\YY, which contain both [ +loc] and [+T] akt FFs, aspec- tual verbs like he+F WIIINI™II or hcconw have only a [+T] akt feature. Consequently, they define purely mental events. which occur in time but not in space.™ In ‚Notes sur :fr.e et cr~~)i/ dans les langues indiennes™, ANNIE MONTAUT brings her vast erudition in Indo-Aryan languages to bear on two issues raised by Benveniste, the use of 6tr.r for both possessive and perfect constructions, and the status of twit. as an inverted ?trr 2. Hindi, an ergative language. lacks the verb mvir. The verb Ctr~ agrees with its object in all expressions of possession. If the object denotes a body part or a kin. the possessor DP takes DAT/GEN case. ™ Our analysis can also account t™or the grammaticality contrast between (i) and (ii). (i) * I cons~lei- my best friend my dog. (ii) I consider my best friend to he my dog. We claimed that e.g.. ~~rnoirr in (46bl above is an asprctually impert™ective verb which denotes B state lasting m tm~ in the canonical construal and a mental process in the inverse construal. Epistemic verbs, as in (i). are not compatible with imperfectivity (cf. ‚John is remaining in Paris™ vs. ‚* I am considering John intelligent™). So the two nominals in (i) shows that the grammaticality of (ii) is not directly a func- tion of the matrix verb. However. although c~~rrsicfe~~ is itself punctual, we propose that it licenses an aspectual feature on fo. plausibly via selection of™ an appropriate operator in the embedded Comp. The merger oF BE with the aspectual F of lo enables the verb to denote a mental trajectory linking its two arguments. thus attaining full interpt-ctation. (48) [ra:m ki:/ke] [do bahneN ] thi:N Ram-GEN/DAT two sisters-fpl BE-imperf.f.pl (Ram has two sisters) Otherwise, the possessor is a locative subject which differs for what we might call ‚individual level™ possession of an inherent quality (49) and ‚stage-level™ possession of a contingent object (50). (49) [un laRk6 meN] [himmat ] thi: these boys-mpl in courage-fsg. be-impf-fsg. (these boys had courage) (50) [ra:m ke pa:s] [bahut kita:beN] haiN Ram near many book-fpl. be-fpl. (Ram has many books) In Hindi as in Latin, the expression of possession is syntactically distinct from that of ‚belonging™: the latter contains no locative element. (51) ]ye kita:beN] [Ra:m ki:] haiN these books Ram-of are (these books are Ram™s) The GEN/DAT case which identifies the possessor in (48) also marks the subject of the active participle in (52). (52) [Mohan Ra:kes ki: likhi:] kaha:ni: [Mohan Rakesh DAT written] story (a story written by M.R.) Adopting Benveniste™s analysis of the Classical Armenian perfect, Montaut char- acterizes the Hindi perfect as an expression of possession in which the GEN/DAT external argument ‚possesses the result of an action™. The active form corresponding to participial (52) is an ergative construction with ERG Agent and verb agreeing with its object. (53) [Mohan Ra:kesh ne] [yah kaha:ni:] likhi: M.R. ERG this story-fsg. write-f.sg. (M.R. wrote this story) Like the participle in (52), the verbal form in (53) shows number and gender agreement but lacks all verbal morphology such as tense, aspect, or voice. Montaut contrasts the r~onrinal stative status of the active participle, which agrees only in number and gender with its ob.ject, with the processive r~r-ha1 status of the passive participle, which takes the auxiliary verb go and an agentive by-phrase. While both active participle and active ergative can take the explicit stative marker hna, no passive form can. She also stresses the fact that in an ergative language the subject is internal to the event domain in a true process clause, but external to the domain in both possesive and ergative clauses. The whole perfect system is in turn radically distinct from the imperfective form, which contains progressive auxiliary BE, and in which a NOM-marked AGENT agrees with the auxiliary. Montaut proposes that the typical indo-aryan perfect without ‚avoir™ in Hindi, Old Bengali, or Marathi represents, with respect to the perfect with ‚avoir™ of the Romance languages, the same inversion as ‚&tre a™ with respect to ‚avoir™ in pos- sessive structures (‚ce livre est a moi™ vs ‚j™ai un livre™). Possession-localization, perfect participles, and ergative structures may all be analysed as deriving from the syntactic inversion of a predicative or processive structure via extemalisation of a subject which localizes a result rather than iniriaring a process. In ‚L™opposition SER et ESTAR en portugais™, JOAO COSTA reexamines the distinction between copula vs aspectual be. Portuguese has two distinct verbs &e, se)- for individual level predicates (54a), and estar for stage-level predicates (54b). (54) a. A Maria C portuguesa. (Maria is Portuguese) b. 0 cafe esta pronto. (The coffee is ready) As Costa shows, the choice of sel- or rstar depends not on the lexical predicate alone, but on the entire pr.etlicariolr. For example, the predicate irc~i&os take se)™ if the subject is linrcies (lemons), but estm if the subject is magas (apples). (55) a. OS limoes sao acidos ILP The lemons are acid. b. As macas estao bcidas. SLP The apples are acid. Such contrasts support the hypothesis that a basic SC predication exists whose con- strual is independent of the verb Ptre whose form it determines. (56) Ivr, [,, ser/estar [,, NP acidos]]] Costa proposes that the difference between WI‚ and estur. (like that between seetlr and r~~rin for Heycock) reduces to syntactic selection: ser selects a bare SC, while rsfcrr. selects a TP. (57) a. .S(‚I‚ [,,_I b. estar ],r,, T [,,_]I Costa adopts the hypothesis of Kratzer (1989) and Diesing (1992) according to which temporary (stage-level) predications contain a spatio-temporal variable 70 Book review I Lingua I12 (20021 53-78 saturated by the ‚T-node. Thus stage-level predications must project a T node, selected by estar, not a bare SC selected by ser. As noted earlier, we take selection to be a grammatical manifestation of the lexi- cal-semantic content of a predicate. Verbs like ser and estar, which are devoid of any content other than the tense and agreement Fs which identify a syntactic predi- cate, cannot participate in syntactic selection. If we associate a structure like (45), proposed above in order to account for inverse vs copula sentences, with all BE sentences, then both ser and estar raise to Asp and T heads. While ser has no aspectual F, which is equivalent to default punc- tual aspect, estar checks an aspectual F in Asp. Consequently, an individual level predicate is construed as a property of the subject which does not exist in discourse time but in the time interval defined by the subject itself, a long time period for lemons in (55a), the life-span of Maria in (54a). Because estar has an aspectual F, a stage-level predicate is linked to the time of enunciation rather than to the time defined by the subject. The Freeze-Kayne interpretation of Benveniste™s ‚avoir est un eﬂtre d inverse™ leads us to expect the absence from natural language of ‚avoir+d™ as an expression of possession. This complex expression would be derived by the redundant merger of an abstract preposition with the output of the incorporation of the same abstract preposition to BE. ‚Avoir + P™ does exist in languages like French and English, but it expresses obligation, not possession (‚J™ai (des chases) a faire™ - I have things to do; I have to do something). However, in ‚Esserci et mvrci: les clitiques sujets et une analyse en ﬁpetite propositionﬂ ‚, Andrea Moro reveals the existence in Italian of the unexpected pos- sessive expression. Moro had earlier analysed existential sentences with there in English or ci in Ital- ian as inverse copula sentences with raised [+loc] SC predicate. (58) a. ci sono molti libri pro ci,+sono [,, [up molti libri] t,] b. there are many books there, +are [,, [or many books] ti] Moro proposes that ci + aye/-e expresses possession in Italian. Although c,i is not obligatorily overt in elevated style it is quasi obligatory when the object is cliticised and it is obligatory in many North Italian dialects, e.g. Pavian (60). (59) i ragazzi (ci) hanno molti libri the boys CI-there have many books (60) I prufesur a ﬁ(gh™) ii han t,. the professors cl-subj Cl-there them have. (the professors have them) Ci+sono and ci+hunr~o are both derived by SC predicate raising. As for esscre and a\‚ere, they are copula verbs inserted in minimally different syntactic structures. CI™+P corresponds to an unaccusative sentence containing a single AGR node, AGR T, which licenses a NOM DP. Ci+ha corresponds to a structure with two AGR nodes, T-AGR and V-AGR, which license both a NOM and an .4CC DP. In the spirit of Hale and Keyser (1993). the interpretation of these structures owes nothing to lex- ical content and everything to structural configuration: existence is the simplest con- strual of a structure with an empty verb and a single AGR node, while possession is the simplest construal of a structure with empty verb and two AGR nodes. Moro™s analysis of ci + izu in Italian does not extend to French and Spanish, how- ever, where the corresponding expressions y+cr and IICI~ denote existence, not pos- session (61) a. II y a un livre sur la table. It there-cl has a book on the table. b. * Jean y a un livre (62) a. b. Jean there has a book. Hay algunos libros sobre la mesa. There+haber some books on the table. * Maria hay unos libros sobre la mesa. Maria there+haber some books on the table. Italian c,i also differs from French and Spanish _Y in that it has an optional person F: the locative morpheme ci alternatively functions as 1 pers. plural clitic pronoun. (63) Non ci rispettano piu no us respect more (they don™t respect us anymore) We could then say that possession is the simplest interpretation of a structure with an empty verb and two AGR nodes, provided the AGR T node has a [+pers] F to check a (+human] subject. This would just be a stipulation, equivalent to Freeze™s analysis of P raising as depending on a (+human] complement of P in (9) above. We would like to suggest, rather. thar c,i and y in Romance, construed as adverbial when linked to an empty XP, are never predicates but, like siisc in the same lan- guages, function as a valence-changing morpheme when adjoined to v. The most common function of Romance SE is to saturate the external argument of a predicate on a low syntactic domain, plausibly VP. before the external argument role has been linked to a nominal. This derives an unaccusative predicate, so that e.g. Spanish ‚se alquilan c3sas™ takes on a passive construal (houses are for rent). Likewise, the merger of .Y to cr\v)ir in French or Spanish changes the valence 01 olvir from transitive (‚la maison a un toit™ the house has a roof) to unaccusative (‚il y a un toit™ - there is a roof). Italian ci is to French x what Italian si is to French SCJ, that is, more than a valence changer. In ‚impersonal structures™, Italian si functions as or binds an argument of the verb. The si structure is transitive and exhibits no definiteness effect (DE). But in French ‚impersonal structures™, se is a valance changer, deriving an an unac- cusative structure with a DE.ﬂ Spanish is midway between French and Italian: it has ﬁimpersonalﬂ SE but tends to use SE rather as a valence changer. 12 Book review, I Lingua 112 (2002) 53-78 (64) Si mangia le mele. (Someone is eating the apples) (65) a. * 11 se mange les pommes. b. 11 se mange beaucoup de pommes ici. Italian is also a pro-drop language while French is not. Plausibly, T has a strong person F in Italian which functions as (or binds a pro) subject. If we assume that the strong person F of Italian T attracts the person F of ci and si to T while the person F in French T cannot, then we can account not only for pro- drop but also for the ability of Italian ci and si to externalize the external argument of V in T rather than absorbing it in v. We conclude that siise and ciiy are particles of the same type, valance changers when adjoined to v. However in a language like Italian with a strong person F in T they can also externalize rather than saturate an external argument. This unification of three differences betweeen Italian and French, pro-drop, tran- sitive vs unaccusative y/d +alhu, and transitive vs unaccusative SE/S1 + verb is not available if ci and 4™ are construed as predicates rather than nominals capable of absorbing or externalizing an argument. In ‚A propos d™&e et mloir en georgien™, LEA NASH develops a detailed mor- pho-syntactic analysis of Are in Georgian. The discussion is so clear and the accom- panying morphological paradigms are so complete that the reader gets a real feel of the language and can follow Nash™s argumentation easily. In the aorist and future tenses, Nash analyzes gr1.e and a\-oir- as bimorphemic verbs derived by prefixation of a reflexive or applicative morpheme to a meaningless root, K (in future) or Q (in aorist). Under the BE construal, the aorist Q and the future K take a prefix i. Like x in Romance, i has a reflexive-benefactive medio-passive function with respect lo the valence of the root verb. i + root derives an unaccusative verb he with NOM sub- ject. Under the uvoir construal, an applicative morpheme a/e/O/ is prefixed to root K with [-animate] direct object and to Q with [+ animate] DO. The applicative prefix licenses a dative rather than a nominative subject. (66) a. Givi ekimi i- kn- eb- a Givi-NOM doctor-NOM SE BE-fut [-Trans] 3sg. (Givi will be a doctor) b. v- i- q™av - i I-NOM SE BE-past (I was . ..) (67) a. m- a- kv -s I-DAT Appl RootK nb.-pres. (I have + [-anim] D.O.) b. m - 0 -q™av - s I-DAT Appl RootQ -pres (I have + [+anim] D.O.) In the present tense Btre is realized by the morpheme ar. (68) v - ar I NOM.-BE (pres) (I am . ..) Unlike the verbal roots K and Q, (11™ takes no reflexive or applicative morphemes at all. Nash points out that the absence of applicative morpheme on the copula in a language in which applicative morphology plays a major syntactic role weakens Freeze and Kayne‚s claim that the verb m'oir derives from the copula + applicative morpheme/abstract P. Nash proposes that its inability to take reflexive or applicative morphemes indi- cates that ~1‚ is not a verb at all, but rather a person morpheme which spells out present tense. The inability to take applicative and reflexive morphemes is not sufficient evi- dence to refuse verbal status to (II™, however. Auxiliary and copula verbs take no prefixal morphology in the general case. (69) unloved, disliked, ap-ply, over-look self-destruct, * unbeen, * dishad, * ap-be, *in-have, *over-be, *self-have (70) a+rriver, dP+gager, sup-primer, inter-dire, se lavel *a&tre, *dCsavoir, *sup&tre, *s+avoir, etc. If we assume that prefixes operate on the lexical content of verbs, then the pres- ence of prefixes with K and Q and their absence with ~11‚ simply means that K and Q have and ur lacks lexical content. In all other respects, a~ functions like any other copula: it is found in predicative sentence, inverse locatives, and as an auxiliary in the progressive form. Moreover, since the same roots K and Q are found in both expressions of existence and expressions of possession in Georgian, I am surprised that Nash calls the result of applicative affixation to K/Q hrr~r rather than hr. Bortolussi points out that the dative possessor is never found in Latin with hahet.e. Nor does Italian ci+a\we. French cnwir or English hcr\~ ever appear with a dative subject or with t1wr.e. According to Mahajan (this volume). ergative languages like Hindi lack the verb hmv. If such is the case, there is an independent typological reason not to expect hut,e in Georgian, an ergative language. Ar, K and Q are all claimed to be meaningless. But the fact that K and Q take modi- fying prefixes. that K expresses future as he and takes a [-animate] D.O. as ‚have™ while Q expresses Past as he and takes a [+ animate] D.O. as ﬁhaveﬂ suggests that rather than lacking content, K and Q have a partially different content. Possibly the two verbal roots share a F-content whose construal varies with the prefix, such that i internalizes a poten- tial argument while the applicative morpheme externalizes it. Distinct akt Fs, such as I+/- extended] may account for the difference in object selection: [-animate] objects, but not [+animate] objects are construed as measuring the action the verb denotes. We have just touched the surface of this rich article which brings us into intimate contact with a language with an elaborate and fascinating morpho-syntax. Nash™s discussion clearly supports the hypothesis of Marantz (1999), namely, that there is no difference between morphology and syntax. LELIA PICABIA™s ‚Accord en D&nitudr dans les phrases attributives du grand comorien™ is another careful study of a language whose morphology is its syntax. Comorian, a Bantu language, has grammatical properties not shared by the other lan- guages discussed in this book, notably agreement in lexical class between the subject and the copula. Other grammatical properties of Comorian are familiar from studies of the Semitic family of languages: present tense predications may, sometimes must, lack the copula. The copula is non-distinct from a pronoun. The verb has an imper- fective form, in which an aspectual prefix (ng) selects a nominalized verb, and a per- fective form, with no prefix and a suffix whose morphological shape depends on the verbal root. Picabia shows that the morphological form of BE in Comorian depends on dis- tinctions in tense, stage-level (SLP) vs Individual level (ILP) predicates, and po- larity. In the present tense, the verb BE reduces to one of two pronominal forms, -pl or p2- with an ILP but takes the progressive prefix ng, with a SLP. Pl is a clitic AGR morpheme used with finite tense, which also functions as an ACC or DAT argument clitic. p2 is the clitic AGR morpheme for nominal sentences with a stative predicate construed as generic, iterative or ILP. Both pronouns require a definite subject. In the past tense, an auxiliary verb is used in addition to agreement. (Class includes number: even number classes, such as 2 and 10, are plural.) (71) ze-mbwaﬂ™ zoiO ntiti (pres-ILP) DEF-dogs AGR-p2 small (the-def dogs are small) (72) ze-mbwaﬂ™ ziﬂ™ ka ntiti (past-ILP) DEF-dogs AGR-pl AUX small (the dogs were small) (73) ze-mbwaﬂ™ ng-izoﬂ hunu (pres-SLP) DEF-dogs NG-AGR-p2 here (the dogs are here) (74) wo-wana™ ng - wa2 disao Def-children imp. pl move (the children are moving) Picabia decomposes the pronominals pl and p2 into two (sets of) syntactic fea- tures, the Class Consonant (e.g. z in Class lo), which she proposes realizes person and nb., and the vowel, which marks definiteness. Pl has a class-determined vowel which is +def and p2 has an invariable vowel o (except for Class 1) which neutral- izes definiteness. Picabia proposes that Pl also functions as head of the Tense pro- jection. The fact that both pl and p2 require definite subjects suggests that the difference between the two pronominal forms of he may not concern definiteness. The rich- ness of the data and the ignorance of the reviewer should discourage speculation, but one wonders whether pl, whose vowel agrees with the subject, may not be a true copula and p2, with invariable vowel, an aspectual verbal root, like rstar, linked to tense via an intervening F-head. UR SHLONSKY undertakes an odyssey ‚A la recherche du temps present: le paradoxe du Benoni en hebreu™. The paradox is that the same morpho-syntactic form functions in Hebrew both as (active or passive) participle and as a present tense verb. among other things. (75) Dani haya kotev sipurim D. BE-past write-Ben. stories (D. was writing stories) (76) Dani koteb™ sipurim D. write-Ben. stories (D is writing stories) Note that the participial Benoni is not to be compared with the perfective and imperfective verbal forms of Standard Arabic. Unlike the Arabic aspectual forms. the Benoni shows agreement in number and gender but not in person. In Hebrew the verb BE (ha~a) can govern only the Benoni, but in Arabic the verb BE (kcrncr) can govern the perfective and imperfective forms as well. Shlonsky shows that the Benoni does not behave like a verb with respect to tem- poral adverbials, position with respect to negation and in its inability to raise to C. Moreover, the Benoni is also used in semi-relative constructions (Siloni, 1995) in which the head corresponds to the subject of the embedded phrase and the relative pronoun is identical to the definite determiner. (77) hine ?is ha-xosev cal kesef. here™s man the thinks-Ben.msg. on money (Here is the man who thinks about money) The semi-relative is to the free relative what a Benoni is to a finite verb: its syn- tactic behavior betrays the absence of a tense node. The ability of the Benoni to function as a present tense in (76) is all the more mysterious. Shlonsky solves the mystery in a straightforward and interesting way: although Hebrew does not realize BE phonologically in the present tense, Shlonsky proposes that covert BE occupies the T node in present tense. (78a) should be represented as (78b). (78) a. ?ani Samen I (am) fat b. ?ani Q) Samen I Be+pres+Isg fat T has morphosyntactic Fs which must be checked by a verb. But the Benoni, which lacks a tense F, cannot raise to T. The quandary is resolved by merging the Benoni with silent BE which raises to T. One argument in favor of the zero BE morpheme in the present is that the present tense takes NEG, an F-Node which always requires a contiguous tense node. (79) Daniela lo tofer-et smalot D. NEG sew-Ben-fsg. dresses Moroever, while an embedded participial Benoni can never raise to Comp, cre- ating a subject-verb inversion configuration, a present tense Benoni can. (80) a. YaxSav Daniela tofer-et smalot now D. sew(Ben)-fsg. dresses b. YaxSav tofer-et Daniela smalot now sew(Ben) f.sg. D. dresses In (SO), the Benoni which has no T F to check in C merges with the auxiliary which does have one, and raises to C ‚piggy-back™. Shlonsky proposes that a participle has a formal feature F which must be checked in Tense. An auxiliary must raise to Tense to check its T-feature. If an auxiliary is lexically present, the participle checks its FF within a T-chain (Gueron and Hoekstra, 1988). If the auxiliary is empty, the Benoni provides it with lexical support. BE+benoni raise to T to check the F feature of the Benoni and the T F of BE. This F F is an aspectual F, such as ‚stative™ or ‚dynamic™, which projects an AspectP between AgrPrtP, the head of the participle, and VP. The participle raises to Asp to check its aspectual F and Aspect, which has a tense F, raises to Tense. Thus, while Hebrew has simple forms of past and future, the present tense is a complex structure with zero BE plus Benoni. This analysis of Hebrew recalls the standard analysis of English tenses, where the past tense (if not the future) is simple and the present tense is complex with event verbs. In both cases, a base form - par- ticiple or stem - raises to an aspectual head - zero or in!: - which combines with a copula (full or silent BE) which itself raises to Tense. This procedure allows the par- ticiple or stem to check its aspectual F and the copula to check its T feature. 3. Conclusion This is a very rewarding book, as we hope our discussion shows. It contains both new data and new analyses of the grammar of BE. The articles invaryingly inform the reader while provoking her or him to careful examination of each new hypoth- esis. Several important conclusions emerge. One is the implausibility of deriving HAVE from BE + P. Another is the widespread construal over languages of BE as a pronominal. The discussion supports Postma™s (1993) proposal that the construal of BE as a pronoun accounts for the absence over languages of ‚Jean est CtC™, by Prin- ciple B of the Binding Theory. The level of discussion is uniformly very high. It is clear that an attentive editor read and commented on all the articles. It would have been good, however, if the authors had been able to organize a workshop or round table to discuss their articles. Mahajan, Montaut and Nash could have advanced the discussion of the relation between possessive dative structures, which are widespread over languages, and ergative language typology. Picabia and Shlonsky might have explored the similar copula systems of Bantu and Semitic lan- guages and compared the complex present tense in Comorian and Hebrew. Nash and Picabia could have advanced the discussion of copula BE as a pronominal, a person F, or a tense marker on the basis of the facts of Georgian and Comorian. In his presentation, Rouveret refers to Heycock and Kroch™s (1996) arguments against the small clause hypothesis for inverse copula, identificational and specifica- tional BE. A dialogue between Moro and the Heycock of this book, both of whom rely crucially on the SC hypothesis, would have been welcome. A second point is that while the book is entitled ﬁEtre and Avoirﬂ, and contains exhaustive far-reaching discussion of he, there is virtually nothing on avoir. Borto- lussi, Montaut, Nash, and Moro all argue that a\vir does not derive from i?tw 2. This follows naturally if &be bears only tense and AGR morphemes while uvoir is the vestigial form of a lexical verb with more content. Alongside Costa™s discussion of ser. and ester, a discussion of hahe~~ vs terw would have helped to fill out the pic- ture. These desiderata are perhaps utopic. Had the authors organized a round table, the publication of the book would have been considerably delayed. As for mvir, other books discuss its various uses.™ An implicit dialogue will take place in any case between each reader and each author which can be extended through letters and email. As it is, the book is an extremely valuable study of BE. Rouveret™s introduction alone is worth the price of the book and the effort of refreshing one™s college French. And all the chapters are just as interesting as the first one. References Benveniste. E., 1960. Etre et avoir dans leurs fonctions linguistiques. Bulletin de la SociCtC Linguistique de Paris. Reprinted in Benveniste (1966). Problemes de linguistique generale. Paris: Gallimard. Carlson, G., 1977. Reference to kinds in English. Dissertation, University of Massachusetts at Amherst. Chomsky. N.. 199X. Minimalist inquiries: The Framework. MITWPL. Cambridge, MA. Couquaux. D.. 1981. French predication and linguistic theory. In: R. May and J. Koater. eds., Levels of syntactic representation. Dordrecht, Foria. Diesing, M., 1992. Indefinites. Cambridge. MA. MIT Press. Dikken. M. den, 1993. Predicate inversion and minimality. Ms. Free University, Amsterdam. Dobrovie-Sorin, 1997. Classe de predicats. distribution des indefinis et la distinction thetique-cate- gorique. Le GrC des Langues. Fauconnier, B.. 1992. Roles and values: The case of French copula constructions. In: C. Georgopoulos and R. Ishihara, eds., Essays in honor of S.-Y. Kuroda. Dordrecht, Foris. Gueron. J., 1994a. Beyond predicationﬂ. In: G. Cinque et al., Paths towards universal grammar: Studies in honor of Richard Kayne. 173-l 87. Washington: Georgetown University Press. See for example the articles by Harley and Gueron in Gueron and Zribi-Hertz (1998) &&on, J., 1994b. On HAVE and BE. Proceedings of Nels 25, GLSA. Gutron, J., T. Hoekstra, 1988. T-chains and the constituent structure of auxiliaries, Constituent structure. Foris, Dordrecht. GuCron, J., T. Hoekstra, 1992. Chaines temporelles et phrases riduites. In: H.G. Obenauer et A. Zribi- Hertz, eds., Structure de la phrase et thCorie du liage. PUV, UniversitC de Paris VIII. GuCron, J., A. Zribi-Hertz, eds., 1998. La grammaire de la possession. Presses de I™UniversitC de Paris Heim, I., 1982. The semantics of definite and indefinite noun phrases. Dissertation, University of Mass- achusetts, Amherst. Heycock, C.. A. Kroch, 1996. Pseudocleft connectivity: Implications for the LF interface level. Edin- burgh Occasional Papers in Linguistics, University of Edinburgh. Higgins, F.R., 1973. The pseudo-cleft construction in English. New York, Garland. Hoekstra, T., Mulder, R.. 1990. Unergatives as copular verbs: Locational and existential predication. The Linguistic Review, 7, l-79. t_Ijemslev. L., 194X. Le verbe et la phrase nominale. In: MClanges de philologie. de IittCrature et d™hic- toire anciennes offerts g J. Marouzeau. Reprinted in Hjelmslev, L. (197 I). Essais linguistiques. Paris: Editions de Minuit. Kayne, R.. 1993. Toward a modular theory of auxiliary selection. Studia Linguistica 47; 3-3 I Kleiber. G., 198 I. Problkmes de rCf&ence: Descriptions definies et noms propres. Paris: Klincksieck. Kuroda, S.-Y., 1972. The categorial and the thetic judgement: Evidence from Japanese syntax, Founda- tions of Language 9. 153-185. Kuroda. S.-Y.. 1995. Sentences, judgements and propositions. Ms. University of California, San Diego. Lyons. J., 1967. A note on possessive. existential and locative sentence<. Foundations of Language 3. 390-396. Lyons. J., 1970. Linguistique g&&ale: Introduction h la linguistique theorique. Paris, Larousse, trans. of J. Lyons. (196X). Introduction to Theoretical Linguistics. Cambridge, CUP. Marantz, A., 1999. Morphology as syntax lectures. Universite de Paris VIII. Meillet, A., 1934. Introduction ?i I™Ctude comparative des langues indo-europ~ennes. Paris: Hachette. Reproduced by the University of Alabama Press, 1963. Milsark, G.. 1977. Towards an explanation of certain peculiarities of the existential construction in Eng- lish. Linguistic Analysis 3. l-29. Mom, A.. 19X8. Per une teoria unificata delle frasi copulari. Revista di Grdmmatica Generativa 13, XI-1 IO. Moro, A., 1991, The raising of predicates: Copula. expletives and existence. MIT Working Papers in Linguistics, IS, Il9~181. Postma. G., 1993. The syntax of the morphological defectivity of BE. HIL Manuscripts I, 31-67. Rouveret. A.. 1996. Bod in the present tense and in other tenses. In: R. Borsley, I. Roberts. cds.. The Syntax of the Celtic languages. Cambridge, CUP. Siloni. T., 1995. On participial relatives and complementizer D: a case study in Hebrew and French. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 13, 445-1-X7. Stowell. T., I98 I. Origins of phrase structure. Dissertation, MIT. 