ELSEVIER Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 www.eIsevier.com/locate/lingua C, T, and the subject: That-t phenomena revisited* Anna ROUSSOU*,™ Department of Foreign Languages and Literatures, University of Cyprus, P.O. Box 20537, CY-1060 Nicosia, Cyprus Received 20 May 2000; revised version 16 December 2000 Abstract The purpose of this paper is to provide a novel account to ‚that-t™ phenomena, following minimalist assumptions. Taking subject extraction out of complement clauses (the ‚that-t™ effect) as the key case, it is argued that the licensing and identification parts of the ECP cor- respond to PF and LF requirements respectively. In particular, subject extraction over that yields ungrammaticality because in this case the Agr-features of T fail to be lexicalized; thus the CP phase contains features that have not been satisfied and the derivation crashes. C,, is taken to correspond to the realization of the feature content of T (plus Agr) in C, thus allow- ing for the lexicalization of Agr. The interpretation of Agr as a variable is determined in con- nection with the wh-phrase in the matrix Spec,CP via the operation Agree. To this end, I con- sider the relation between C and T, the one between C and Agr in non-extraction contexts as well (e.g. ‚pro-drop™ under V2), and also the parameterization of subject extraction as a by- product of the different ways of lexicalizing Agr and/or C. The proposed analysis succeeds in deriving the empirical effects of the ECP derivationally, without furthermore postulating extra technical devices such as proper head government and traces. 0 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Agree; Complementizer; Merge; Lexicalize; Phase; Phi-features; Tense I would like to thank Misi Brody, Noam Chomsky, Henry Davis, Ken Hale, Giuseppe Longobardi, Ursel Luhde, Rita Manzini, Gereon Muller, Maire Noonan, Ian Roberts, Johan Rooryck, Alain Rouveret, Heloisa Salles, Neil Smith, Ianthi Tsimpli, Sten Vikner and two anonymous reviewers for discussions and comments. Special thanks to Rita Manzini and Ian Roberts for discussions on the topic over the years, and to Johan Rooryck and Neil Smith as the Lingua editors. More recent versions of the paper were presented at seminars at University College London (May 1998), the University of Stuttgart (June 1998), and the IATL conference (Haifa, June 1999). The present version is based on my GLOW 23 (April 2000) talk. I am grateful to all audiences for comments. * Phone: +357 2 892108; Fax: +357 2 750310; E-mail: anna@ucy.ac.cy ™ Present address: Department of Philology, University of Patras, 26500 Rio, Patras, Greece (phone: +0030-6 l-996234). 0378.2166/02/$ - see front matter 0 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-384 1(00)00056-5 14 A. Roussou I tingua 112 (2002) 13-52 1. Introduction: the problem The Government and Binding (GB) framework (Chomsky, 1981, 1986a,b) distin- guished between two locality conditions: the Empty Category Principle (ECP), oper- ating on representations, and Subjacency, a constraint on derivations. The postulation of two distinct conditions was necessary in a framework that made use of three dif- ferent levels of representation (D-, S-structure, and LF), as well as a transformational component relating them. Thus Subjacency, which required no crossing of more than one barrier in a single step, measured movement, and in this way ensured that move- ment is successive cyclic. The ECP, on the other hand, imposed a well-formedness condition on traces and their antecedents, requiring that traces be properly governed (cf. Chomsky, 1981, 1986b). Proper government took the form of either head gov- ernment or antecedent government (Chomsky, 1986b) or both (Rizzi, 1990). The Minimalist program (Chomsky, 1995, 1998) brought along with the elimina- tion of D- and S-structure, the elimination of the ECP as well. In particular, proper head government no longer holds, on the basis that there is no principled distinction between proper and non-proper head governors. At the same time the ECP was paired with the presence of traces as separate syntactic entities, defined along the +/-anaphor, +/-pronoun specifications. In minimalism, on the other hand, A™-traces at least reduce to copies of the moved element. Copies as such, unlike traces, do not seem to be in need of any special licensing conditions. Thus not only is part of the biclausal ECP removed in minimalism, but also the objects on which it operates are no longer definable. What remains from the original ECP then is some form of antecedent government stated as a well-formedness condition on chain links. The effects of antecedent government are subsumed under the Minimal Link Condition (MLC) which basically states that the operation Agree is sensitive to potential inter- veners, as in (1) below (adapted from Chomsky, 1999). Agree establishes a syntac- tic relation between two elements ~1, y, such that u is the probe and y the goal: (1) The Minimal Link Condition Agree (a, y) is barred, if probe a matches p which is closer to a than matching Y. As (1) shows, the MLC represents a modified version of Rizzi™s (1990) Relativized Minimality. Furthermore, Chomsky (1998, 1999) argues for a strictly derivational model of grammar where the notion of the phase plays a crucial role: it defines the cycle on which (parts of) LF and PF are built. In Chomsky™s (1999: 9) terms ﬁ. . . features deleted within the cyclic computation remain until the phase level, at which point the whole phase is ‚handed over™ to the phonological componentﬂ. CP and VP are called strong phases. Chomsky (1999: 10) proposes the Phase Impenetrability Condition (PIC) below: (2) The Phase Impenetrability Condition (PIG): The domain of H is not accessible to operations outside HP, but only H and its edge. A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 15 The cyclicity effects of Subjacency are now captured directly by the notion of phase, which ensures that wh-elements for example move to the (intermediate) Spec,CP from where they may be accessible to further operations involving the next phase. The question that remains is whether standard LF (ECP) effects can be captured in a derivational model. A positive answer to this question may turn out to have the- oretical implications: if standard ECP-effects are captured derivationally, then the preference for a representational vs. derivational model will receive very little empir- ical support. On the more empirical side, it may provide us with a more adequate analysis of certain phenomena that have been problematic in current research. One such case concerns subject/object asymmetries, typically stated in the form of the that-t effect (cf. Perlmutter, 1971), illustrated in (3): (3) a. Which author do you think (*that) won the prize? b. Which author do you think (that) Bill supported? In (Standard) English subject extraction out of a complement clause is possible to the extent that the lexical complementizer that is absent. Such a restriction though does not hold for objects (or even adjuncts). Chomsky and Lasnik (1977) captured the ungrammatical version of (3a) by means of a filter (the that-t filter) which essen- tially ruled out a that-trace sequence. Given the limitations of such a filter, a more principled account was sought which attributed the ungrammatical (3a) to a well- formedness condition on the distribution of traces, namely the ECP (Kayne, 1984; Taraldsen, 1979; Pesetsky, 1981-1982; Chomsky, 1986b; Rizzi, 1990). The exact account of the ungrammaticality varies, depending on the formulation of the ECP. For example Rizzi (1990) argues for a conjunctive ECP that requires that both head government (formal licensing) and antecedent government (identification) be satis- fied. (3a) is ungrammatical because I cannot head govern the subject trace within its immediate projection (I™). The next potential head, C, does not qualify as a proper head governor when that is present, so the trace in SpecJP is not licensed. On the other hand, Co does, since it carries agreement triggered by the intermediate trace in Spec,CP. In the other analyses mentioned above, the problem is located in the re- lation between the original trace in Spec,IP and the intermediate trace in Spec,CP; this relation (antecedent government, index copying, etc.) is blocked when a lexical C is present. The problem that arises in the Minimalist framework regarding (3a) is obvious. Once the ECP is no longer defined, the question is whether the MLC or even the notion of phase can account for the that-t effect. It is fairly clear that the MLC has no role to play in this case, as there are no potential interveners. In other words, it is difficult to see how that would count as a closer goal for the wh-phrase, or for an intermediate copy in the embedded Spec,CP. In this respect Rizzi™s (1990) analysis is to be favored as it attributes the problem to the C-subject relation, and not antecedent government. Recourse to a filter is not desirable either, as the filter will simply have to be stipulated to hold in a language particular fashion, failing to cap- ture the underlying properties of the particular grammar. The point then is whether 16 A. Roussou I Lingua I12 (2002) 13-52 the notion of phase (and its effects in the form of the PIC) is somehow relevant. At a first approximation, it is not so obvious how an analysis of this type can be for- mulated, especially as it would have to be restricted to features associated with the subject and not the object, given the contrast in (3). The aim of this paper is to show that this is indeed possible. To some extent the answer to the problem presented by (3) amounts to a reconciliation of the ECP and filter approaches in the sense that the former attributed the problem to LF, while the latter to PF. In GB, or even early minimalism (Chomsky, 1995), such a reconcilia- tion is not possible as PF and LF do not see each other, i.e. feature checking/deletion takes place before or after spell-out. The outcome is different though in a model that does not distinguish between an overt and a covert (derivational) component, i.e. in a model where PF and LF are built in parallel in a cyclic fashion. This is where the notion of phase may turn out to be crucial. Regarding subject extraction, the ques- tion is how the phi-features of the subject are satisfied inside the phase with Co, but blocked with that. The analysis is built on the following two ideas. First, lexical items are directly merged in the position where they surface (Manzini and Roussou, 2000). Thus the wh-phrase is directly merged in the matrix Spec,CP. Second, the zero form of C in the embedded clause is the morphological reflex of the Agree re- lation between T and C, which in more standard terms would be expressed as T-to- C movement (cf. Roussou, 1994). Adopting and adapting Chomsky™s (1999) EPP- feature, I will assume that the EPP serves as an instruction for the PF-realization of the feature it is associated with (cf. Roberts and Roussou, 1999; Roberts, 2000). In the case of T, the EPP is responsible for the presence of a DP in Spec,TP, which also enters an Agree relation and values the phi-features of T. Thus the subject essentially spells out these features. When the subject is in Spec,CP, it cannot spell-out the phi- features of T (i.e. the EPP cannot be satisfied), unless some other mechanism is available. The C-T relation is the key answer to this problem: T-raising can carry along the phi-features of the subject, which are now realized on C (i.e. the EPP is satisfied on C). The presence of a lexical C, on the other hand, blocks T-movement, or more precisely the presence of T and its phi-features on C. As a result the embed- ded CP-phase contains an EPP-feature that has not been satisfied: the phi-features of T fail to receive a PF-realization. The EPP cannot be satisfied at the next phase due to the PIC, and the derivation crashes, yielding ungrammaticality (the ‚that-t™ effect) as expected. This approach maintains Rizzi™s (1990) original insight regarding the relation between C and the subject, and it effectively reduces formal licensing to a condition with the PF-interface (i.e. the nominal features of the subject need to be lexicalized in English). The identification part of the ECP is derived by the operation Agree that connects the wh-phrase with the embedded Agr-features. Due to this operation, Agr is interpreted in association with the wh-phrase, i.e. as part of the wh- dependency, and in particular as a variable. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 outlines the analysis and provides empirical evidence from English. Section 3 discusses the relation between T and C in more detail, considering data from Standard and Belfast English. Section 4 con- siders the realization and interpretation of the phi-features of the subject in as- sociation with T and C. Section 5 provides further empirical evidence to support the A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 17 present analysis, by considering the parameterization of subject extraction. Finally, Section 6 concludes the discussion. 2. Subject extraction and the C-T relation The starting point of our discussion is the subject/object asymmetry in (3), and in particular the unavailability of subject extraction over a lexical C in languages like English. The relation between C and the extraction site of the subject is not restricted to this context only. As is well known, asymmetries of this type arise in main clauses, as well as in relatives (cf. 4 and 5 respectively): (4) a. Who won the prize? b. *Who did win the prize? c. What did Peter win? (5) a. The man (*that) won the prize is my friend. b. The man (that) Peter met is my friend. The examples in (4a) and (5a) differ from (3a) in one important aspect: the former involve local movement of the subject to Spec,CP, while the latter involves move- ment across a clause boundary. In all cases though the interaction between the subject gap and its adjacent C has been attributed to some sort of an ECP effect (Koopman, 1983, for example 4, Rizzi, 1990, for examples 4 and 5), which does not arise in the case of object movement. This local configuration between C and the subject is cap- tured by Rizzi™s (1990) definition of proper head government, and it is this intuition that I™d like to maintain in the present analysis. However, I will argue that this re- lation is mediated via T, the head that forms an Agree relation with both the subject and C: the phi-features of T are the probe for the subject (the goal), while C itself is the probe for T (the goal). The C-T relation has been discussed quite extensively in the literature in terms of finiteness (e.g. den Besten, 1983; Holmberg and Platzack, 1995; Rizzi, 1997; Roberts and Roussou, in press; among others) or Tense anchor- ing (Stowell, 1982; Enc, 1987). In the present paper, I will assume that the property that relates C and T is Finiteness. Let us first focus on the Agree relation between T and the subject. The presence of a subject in Spec,TP (or IP in older analyses) has been attributed to the Extended Pro- jection Principle (EPP) (Chomsky, 1982). In Chomsky (1998, 1999) the EPP has been modified as to hold of all functional heads, and not just T. The presence of an EPP- feature on a functional head F accounts for the presence of an XP as its specifier. The EPP is a parameterized property. The example in (6) shows how the EPP-feature of T is satisfied in English (for presentational purposes only I use the trace I notation): (6) [rP Peter Agr-T [vp tPeter won the prize]] The phi-features of T receive a value by entering an Agree relation with Peter in the VP domain. The set of phi-features of T is the probe, while the DP Peter is the goal. 18 A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 Given that T has an EPP-feature, Peter is pied-piped and merged with T, yielding Spec,TP (second Merge). Chomsky (1999) also argues that there is no separate oper- ation Move. The results of movement are captured by means of the two primitive operations Merge and Agree. The probe-goal relation is part of Agree, a feature matching operation, and is triggered by the presence of features that need to be val- ued. At the same time, the EPP ensures pied-piping of an appropriate goal in the local domain of the probe (i.e. within the phase). If there is no EPP-feature, there is no pied-piping of lexical material, but there is still an Agree relation. Furthermore, Chomsky (1999) dispenses with multiple Merge, arguing that Merge takes place only once. For example the arguments Peter and the prize above are merged in their respective thematic positions, i.e. inside the VP. Chain formation is viewed as a list of occurrences of a lexical item in different positions. The most embedded occur- rence is at the position of Merge, while the highest one is visible for spell-out at PF.* Going back to (6) then, Peter is merged inside the VP, but is spelled out in Spec,TP. As the brief discussion of (6) above shows, the spell-out position of the subject coincides with the presence of the EPP-feature, as well as with the presence of unvalued phi-features on T, which the DP effectively lexicalizes. It is not very clear what the EPP amounts to, apart from being a diacritic that triggers second merge (a specifier). On the basis of the interplay between the EPP, unvalued features, and spell-out, we could interpret the EPP-property as a diacritic that marks features for PF-realization (cf. Roberts and Roussou, 1999; Roberts, 2000). Under this reformu- lation, the EPP in (6) indicates that the set of phi-features of T needs to be spelled out. The DP in Spec,TP lexicalizes these features, and at the same time values them, i.e. assigns them an interpretation (e.g. 3rd person singular), under Agree. While the EPP-property interfaces with PF, the relation established by Agree is relevant for LF-interpretability. In principle, Agree holds irrespectively of the EPP. Notice that the DP includes a D-feature as well. So we could say that the set of phi-features of T also includes D, essentially the nominal features of the subject; for this reason I will simply use the cover term Agr. Thus Agr in (6) is valued as being Referential, 3rd person singular (masculine). According to the structure in (6) the DP Peter is first merged inside the VP. For Chomsky (1995, 1999) this is necessary on the basis that theta-roles are determined configurationally (cf. Hale and Keyser, 1993). However, there is an alternative theorizing that takes theta-roles to reduce to features, which can also be manipulated by the derivational component (cf. Homstein, 1999; Manzini and Roussou, 2000). In particular, Manzini and Roussou (2000) argue that under this view we can distin- guish between argument (D- and phi-features) and thematic features. In other words, arguments and theta-roles need not match at the position of Merge. Furthermore, if we assume that thematic features are associated with V-heads in the VP-shell, we are also able to maintain the essence of the configurational approach of Hale and Keyser (1993). Within this framework, arguments are directly merged in the position where 2 This is reminiscent of Brody™s (1995) representational approach, according to which only the root position(s) in a chain can be the thematic one. Which position in the chain is spelled out is determined by the Principle of Morphological Transparency. A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 19 they surface (regulated by the EPP as modified above). From that position the oper- ation Agree connects them to the (V) head that bears the theta-role. Going back to (6), the DP Peter is directly merged in T (Spec,TP), as in (7) (we are glossing over VP) : (7) [TP Peter Agr-T [vp won0 the prize]] The operation Agree syntactically connects the DP and the predicate (Peter, won,). The former realizes the nominal features of the subject (Agr), while the latter pro- vides this argument with a theta role. Since Peter simply spells out the Agr-features of T, the actual relation is between Agr and the predicate. In other words, the Agree relation between Agr (probe) and the predicate (goal) holds in any case for reasons that have to do with LF-interpretability: an argument needs a theta-role and a theta- role needs an argument.™ Whether (and how) Agr is lexicalized is a PF-property that depends on the presence of an EPP-feature on T. Notice though that the way Agr is spelled out also partly determines the value of its features. As already mentioned merger of the DP Peter in (6) fixes the value of Agr as being Referential, 3rd person singular (masculine). If there is no DP present, then valuation of these features will have to be determined otherwise, as we will see shortly (see also Section 4). Bearing the above modifications in mind, let us now go back to subject extraction out of a complement clause, as in @a-b). The wh-phrase is directly merged in the matrix Spec,CP where it realizes the wh-feature of C (the EPP-property of C): (8) a. *Which author do you think [c. that won the prize]? b. Which author do you think [cp won the prize]? If which author, which corresponds to the embedded subject, is merged in Spec,CP, the question is how the Agr-features of the embedded T are lexicalized and valued. Recall that the EPP is an instruction for the PF-realization of these features. How- ever, there is no DP available to fulfill this requirement (in fact the DP is embedded inside the wh-phrase in Spec,CP). As the contrast between (8a) and (8b) shows, the result is ungrammatical only when that is present. If the problem resides on the re- alization of Agr of the embedded T, and given the contrast in (8), we can argue that this realization is blocked when that is present, but possible otherwise. The question then is what the zero form of the embedded C amounts to in this context and how it contributes to the satisfaction of the EPP-property of T. In other words, how C con- tributes to the PF-realization of Agr (i.e. the nominal features of the subject). To illustrate this point, suppose that in @a> we™ve reached that stage in the deriva- tion where T is merged. The next step involves merger of a DP, given the EPP. 3 Under this approach there is no need to assume the presence of uninterpretable features as triggers for Agree (cf. Brody, 1997; Roberts and Roussou, 1999; Manzini and Savoia, in press). Moreover, it is possible to take Agr as an interpretable head, situated between C and T, that carries features such as D, Person, Number, or even take each of these features to correspond to distinct heads (cf. Poletto, 2000; Manzini and Savoia, in press). For ease of exposition I will stick to a single T-head which carries Agr as well; the alternative of having a separate Agr-head(s) does not affect the analysis that follows. 20 A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 There is no DP present to fulfill this role though. We then move to the next step and merge that as in (9a): (9) Lcp that lTP Agr-T [VP V 111 The CP counts as a phase, so it can be handed over to PF. However, the phase con- tains features which have not been satisfied. In particular the EPP-property of T is not satisfied, as there is no DP to spell-out Agr in T. The PIC blocks these features from being accessible to further operations involving the next phase, and the deriva- tion crashes. The ‚that-t™ effect then is restricted to the realization of phi-features associated with the subject without having any recourse to special licensing con- ditions for traces. In fact, there is no trace/copy present in (9). I will come back to this point shortly. Consider next what happens when C is zero, as in (8b). The relation between C and T has been rather well established in the literature (see the references above), and I will simply assume that the relevant feature is Finiteness. The C-T connection is established by Agree: C is the probe and T is the goal. Suppose that this relation can be morphologically expressed in two ways: either by having a distinct lexical item to realize C, or by having T itself in C. In the former case, the heads C and T are independently lexicalized. In the latter case, the feature content of T lexicalizes both C and T; this option is blocked when that is merged, in the same way that merger of an expletive in Spec,TP blocks merger of the associate in this position. Restricting our attention to the C-system, it is in fact independently known that a lexical C is incompatible with ‚T-to-C movement™, as the complementary distribu- tion of V2 with a lexical complementizer shows in languages like German (cf. den Besten, 1983). The realization of T in C takes along the phi-features associated with T, as illustrated in (10): (10) [CP C-As-T [TP tAgr-T . . .I] The Agr features can now be realized, by entering a head-head relation with C. In other words, they are spelled-out on C, so their PF-realization is ‚parasitic™ on that of C (via the C-T relation). This alternative mechanism accounts for the contrast regarding subject extraction illustrated in (8) above. No ‚that-t™ effect arises, since the EPP-property of T is satisfied albeit in a different fashion. The EPP-feature of T is satisfied inside the CP-phase and the derivation converges, as expected. The proposed analysis incorporates the intuition of Rizzi™s (1990) account, namely that C and the subject trace enter a local relation. In current terms, the rele- vant relation is between C and the nominal features of the subject (Agr), and more precisely in the way these features are lexicalized. Thus the licensing condition of the ECP is now reformulated as a condition that relates to the PF-interface, i.e. spell- out. If the present analysis is on the right track, then we capture one more property of the licensing condition of the ECP, namely the fact that the set of proper gover- nors varies cross-linguistically. In current terms this reduces to a property of the PF-interface. More precisely, as far as subject extraction is concerned, parametric A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 21 variation is a by-product of the different lexicalizations of Agr (see Section 5). The analysis suggested here differs from Rizzi™s (1990) in other respects as well. For example, it takes the relation between C and Agr to be mediated by T, and in par- ticular by the presence of the feature content of T in C. Moreover, it dispenses with the postulation of traces or copies. Whatever effects hold of copies (e.g. reconstruc- tion) will now have to be taken to hold of Agr (in particular the relation between Agr and the predicate), since this is the position where the D- and phi-features of the sub- ject are represented. A full discussion of reconstruction effects in the present context would take us too far afield, so I leave this issue open (but see Manzini and Rous- sou, 2000; Platzack, to appear).l Going back to (lo), it is crucial to note that although Co succeeds in lexicalizing Agr, it cannot value Agr™s features. In other words, the interpretation of Agr is not fixed by C, but is determined in the next phase by the wh-phrase. This is consistent with Chomsky™s (1999: 10) claim that ﬁinterpretation/evaluation for PH, is at the next relevant phase PH,ﬁ. To illustrate this point, consider how the derivation pro- ceeds in the grammatical version, i.e. with that absent, as shown in (11): (11) [c,, u#zich author do you think [cr C-Agr-T [rP tAfr_T [vp won the prize]]]] Once the CP-phase is completed, the derivation proceeds, merging matrix V, T and C. The wh-phrase (which author) is directly merged in the matrix Spec,CP, where it realizes the wh-feature of C, an operator feature. Recall that Agree connects the embedded Agr with the predicate, yielding the argument-theta-role pair. At the same time, in the absence of a DP present, the features of Agr remain unvalued, although lexicalized by C. Valuation is achieved by establishing a connection (Agree) with the wh-phrase in the matrix Spec,CP. Given that Agr is associated with an operator, its interpretation is restricted to that of a variable. Thus the operator-variable depen- dency satisfies LF-interpretability: under Agree the interpretative properties of both Agr and the wh-phrase are satisfied. Note that valuation of Agr as part of the wh- dependency essentially derives the antecedent government condition (identification) of the ECP. Thus the present account succeeds in deriving the effects of the (con- junctive) ECP derivationally, by attributing them to independent conditions of the two interfaces: PF (licensing) and LF (identification) (see also the discussion in Sec- tion 4, and Davis, 2000, with respect to pro). To summarize, in the present section I have argued that the ‚that-t effect arises due to the EPP-feature of the embedded T, which cannot be satisfied when the ™ Manzini and Roussou (2000) mainly discuss reconstruction with respect to A-movement and argue that in an example like (i) binding is subject to a logophoric interpretation of the reflexive (cf. Reinhart and Reuland, 1993). The same account can extend to (ii): himself is interpreted as a logophor, which can be associated with either Peter or John: (i) Pictures of himself worry John. (ii) Which pictures of himself did Peter think worried Jol7n? Manzini and Roussou (2000) also discuss reconstruction of scope and attribute it to the relation between the DP and the predicate (the argument and theta-role positions). Platzack (to appear) takes a similar stand with respect to scope reconstruction. 22 A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 subject is extracted, i.e. when there is no DP to be merged in that position. The derivation converges, however, if the EPP is satisfied in association with C, i.e. via the C-T relation. In particular, it was argued that C,, is the realization of the feature content of T, along with Agr, in C. On the other hand, that blocks this realization, and the derivation crashes, yielding ungrammaticality (the ‚that-t™ effect). While lex- icalization of Agr depends on the C-T relation, its valuation comes from the wh- phrase, giving rise to the formation of an operator-variable dependency as required. In the next two sections I turn to the implications of this analysis regarding the C-T relation and the interpretation of the subject. More precisely, in Section 3 I will consider the zero form of C and the exclusion of ‚T-to-C movement™ in the form of an auxiliary (i.e. *who do you think did win the prize?). In Section 4 I will discuss the unavailability of a referential reading associated with Agr when Co is present and there is no operator-variable dependency formed (i.e. *I think won the prize). 3. The C-T relation and its different manifestations In the preceding section I provided an account of subject extraction out of that- clauses based on the C-T Agree relation. The latter is morphologically expressed in two ways: by merging that, or merging the feature content of T (along with Agr) in C. Subject extraction is compatible with the second realization only. The obvious question is why we do not see an auxiliary (a T-element) in C, i.e. why (12a) is ungrammatical. The problem can be generalized to hold independently of subject extraction: if what is at stake is the presence of T in C, then we would expect to find an auxiliary realizing C instead of the zero morpheme, even in the absence of extrac- tion, as in (12b): (12) a. *Who do you think Icp did [TP win the prize]]? b. *I think did John win the prize. c. I think (that) John won the prize. d. Who do you think (*that) won the prize? What (12a) and (12b) have in common is the exclusion of do-support. (12b), how- ever, becomes grammatical with either C, or that, as in (12c), while (12a) is gram- matical with Co only, as shown in (12d). As far as (12~) is concerned, we could per- haps assume that the C, vs. that alternation is a purely PF-phenomenon, i.e. that optionally drops at PF. Under this assumption the Co in subject extraction (12d) and the one in non-extraction (12~) are treated as different lexical entities: the former, but presumably not the latter, carries Agr (cf. Rizzi, 1990). However, if that-deletion in (12~) were a free PF option, we would expect it to be possible in all (non-subject extraction) contexts, contrary to fact. For example, that cannot delete when the sen- tence it introduces occurs in subject position, as in [*(that) John won the prize] sur- prised me. Based on the distribution of that, I will then assume that the Co in extrac- tion and non-extraction contexts (as in (12~)) is the same item, namely the realization of the feature content of T in C. We will come back to this issue shortly. A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 23 Going back to the ungrammatical data in (12a-b), it is important to note that do- support is indeed possible in embedded clauses in Belfast English (BE) (cf. Henry, 1995: chapter 5; McCloskey, 1992, on other varieties of Hibemo-English). The dis- tribution of do-support in BE is given below: (13) a. Who do you think did John kiss? b. ﬁWho do you think did kiss Mary? c. Who do you think did John say had kissed Mary? d. *I think did John kiss Mary. e. I wonder did John kiss Mary. f. I wonder who did John kiss. g. *I wonder who did kiss Mary. Interestingly, do-support is blocked in two cases: when the embedded declarative is not an extraction domain, as in (13d), and when the embedded C is adjacent to a sub- ject gap, as in (13b) and (13g). In case of subject extraction, Co is required, exactly as in Standard English (SE). This holds for both embedded declaratives and inter- rogatives. Do-support is possible in all other contexts. We then see that BE behaves like SE with respect to subject extraction and the realization of a declarative C in non-extraction contexts. In this respect, the BE data do not form a counterexample to the analysis proposed in the previous section. The problem that remains though is why do-support is blocked when it does, including the context of subject extraction if what is relevant after all is the presence of the feature content of T in C. Let us start by considering the construction in (13d) where the embedded clause is not an extraction domain. (13d) is an embedded declarative, thus contrasting with (13e) which is an embedded interrogative. It is a rather standard assumption that an interrogative C bears a Q-feature, which is absent from a declarative C. The contrast between (13d) and (13e) can then be attributed to this basic property. To be more precise, do in (13e) spells out the Q-feature of C; the absence of this feature in (I 3d) blocks do-support. The underlying idea then is that the presence of an auxiliary in C spells out Q and not finiteness. When this feature is absent, the auxiliary is also absent. Matrix interrogatives provide a clear illustration of this point, as shown in (14) (I will come back to subject matrix questions shortly): (14) a. Did Peter win the prize? b. What did Peter win? c. *The prize did Peter win. d. The prize, Peter won. In (14a-b), C bears a Q-feature, which is spelled out by the auxiliary.s In (14b), the wh-phrase spells out the wh-feature of C. Thus I distinguish between a Q- and a Negative expressions may also trigger inversion, as in: (i) Under no c~ircumstunces would Peter win the prize. There is obviously no Q-feature present in this case, but a Neg-feature. These two features could per- haps collapse under Focus; so it can be argued that what is relevant for subject-auxiliary inversion is 24 A. Roussou I Lingua I12 (2002) 13-52 wh-feature. Both features may coexist, as in the case of wh-interrogatives, but crucially they do not have to (cf. relative clauses and exclamatives, which lack Q but not wh). In (14~) the DP the prize is topicalized, but do-support is blocked, since there is no Q-feature (a declarative C). In fact, topicalization in English does not trigger subject-auxiliary inversion, as (14d) shows. The difference between (14b) and (14d) reflects the residual V2 character of English. Full V2- languages like German, on the other hand, require a verbal element in C (T or V) in all matrix clauses, that is irrespectively of the presence or absence of Q. We then see that the presence of a verbal element in C spells out different features in these two languages. In English it lexicalizes Q, while in German it lexicalizes Finiteness (cf. den Besten, 1983; Holmberg, and Platzack, 1995; Roberts and Roussou, in press), and is therefore independent of the presence of Q. Having clarified the role of the auxiliary in C, we are in a position to account for the ungrammaticality of (13d): do-support is blocked given that the embedded declara- tive C bears no Q-feature. Thus CO and that are the only available realizations, exactly as in SE (cf. 12~). This analysis still leaves (13a), which allows for do-support when (non-subject) extraction has taken place out of the embedded CP, unaccounted for. The obvious question is the following: if the auxiliary spells out Q, how is its presence in (13a) justified, given that the embedded C is declarative, and therefore lacks Q? It seems that its presence will have to be attributed to some other reason. The answer to this question comes from the status of the embedded CP as an extraction domain. Recall that wh-movement and subject-aux inversion can co-occur. While the wh-phrase spells out the wh-feature of C (i.e. it gives us a quantifier), the auxiliary spells out Q (a property of the proposition). Given the correlation between inversion and wh- questions in English, we could say that do-support fulfills one additional role in this context: it marks the extraction domain. Assuming that the domain in this case co- incides with CP, what do-support does essentially is mark the head of the phase. With this clarification in mind, let us now go back to (13a). The role of do-support is determined in connection with the position it occurs in. In particular, while the higher do marks the scope of the wh-phrase (wide scope), the embedded do marks the clause out of which extraction took place. In terms of LF-interpretation, it is the matrix do that counts as the lexicalization of Q, and not the lower one. The question then is how the lower do is licensed, that is what sort of interpretation it receives, if it does. Note that, as already mentioned, the embedded do cannot be interpreted as part of the Agree relation between the matrix V and the embedded C, as the matrix V does not select for an embedded interrogative (on the assumption that selection is also an instance of Agree). Instead, merger of do in this position is related to the presence of a wh-gap in the clause. Suppose then that we™ve reached the stage in the derivation illustrated in (15a) below, which involves merger of the matrix predicate. Given that think does not select for Q, do does not receive any interpretation at this stage, i.e. it the presence of a Focus feature (see also footnote 7). For a discussion of inversion and non-inversion in negative preposing see Cormack and Smith (2000) and Haegeman (2000). A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 2s cannot be interpreted as the lexicalization of Q. Regarding LF, the embedded CP phase is well-formed as interpretation takes place at the next phase. In other words, as long as do will receive an interpretation in the next phase, the derivation will con- verge. The question is whether the embedded CP converges at PF, despite the absence of Q and the presence of do. If the preceding discussion on the correlation of do-support and wh-movement is correct, the embedded CP with do present will converge at PF, as do has an effect at the output. In particular, it overtly marks the presence of a wh-gap in the clause, i.e. the formation of a wh-dependency. Do then counts as a PF-diacritic for marking the embedded clause as an extraction domain. Once matrix V is merged, the derivation proceeds by merging the matrix T and C heads as in (15b). C bears both a Q and a wh-feature, which are satisfied by merg- ing the auxiliary do and ~40 respectively: (15) a. [vf think [cp did, CTP Peter kiss 111 b. [cp who do, [Tp you think lcp did, lTP Peter kiss 1111 The operation Agree relates MAO to the relevant argument position inside VP in the embedded clause. At this point of the derivation the formation of the wh-depen- dency is completed. The embedded do now receives an interpretation (is licensed in more standard terms), as part of this dependency, and the derivation converges at LF.(™ If the above account is on the right track, we observe that BE and SE then dif- fer along the following lines: BE has a mechanism of marking the extraction domain as well, by making use of do-support (or auxiliary inversion in general).7 In SE, on the other hand, this option is not available. Instead, SE takes the option of spelling out the relation between the matrix predicate and the embedded C, thus yielding C,, or thar. We then see that each of these two grammars opts for the realization of dif- ferent features on the embedded C, when extraction is at stake. Notice that these options relate to PF and not LF, and are thus consistent with the idea that parametric variation relates to the different realizations of features. Let us now consider the unavailability of do-support in subject extraction in BE, illustrated with the ungrammatical (13b). As the grammatical (13~) shows, subject extraction in BE proceeds as in SE, i.e. C,) must be present. However, this restriction only holds for the C adjacent to the extraction site; do-support can take place in the next higher C-position (Alison Henry, personal communication). In terms of the analysis suggested above regarding do in extraction contexts, the absence of do-sup- port in ( 13b) can be taken as an indication that do cannot be used to mark the extrac- tion domain where the subject gap appears. Recall that Co is the realization of the feature content of T, along with Agr, in C. Recall also that this option is the only one that makes the derivation converge, as it allows for the EPP-feature of T to be Thanks to Johan Rooryck for discussing the analysis of ( I3a) with me. ™ Other effects on the intermediate C could perhaps be accounted for along these lines. The relevant cases concern embedded V2 in German when extraction takes place (cf. Miiller, 1995), ‚wh-copying™ in various German dialects (cf. McDaniel, 1989). or the presence of different lexical complementizers, as in Irish (McCloskey, 1990; Noonan, 1997). What property exactly is responsible for this parametric vari- ation is subject to further investigation. 26 A. Roussou I Linguu 112 (2002) 13-52 satisfied in the absence of a full DP. The Agr-features become valued (i.e. inter- preted) at the next phase in association with the wh-phrase. What happens if do is present? According to the analysis suggested above, the auxiliary indicates that extraction has taken place, i.e. that there is a wh-gap somewhere in the clause. How- ever, if do is present, Agr cannot be realized, and the derivation crashes as the CP- phase contains features that have not been satisfied. Moreover, the presence of the gap in subject extraction crucially relates to the presence of Agr in C. When do is present, this realization is blocked, and the presence of a gap is also blocked. Thus the result is ungrammatical as expected. In this respect, both do and that have the same effect: they both block the realization of Agr. This is akin to the ‚that-t™ effect, and it comes as no surprise that BE behaves like SE with respect to subject extrac- tion out of a complement clause (cf. Rizzi, 1997; Pesetsky and Torrego, in press). Of course this holds of the C adjacent to the subject position only. Indeed as (13~) shows nothing prevents do-support from taking place in the next available (interme- diate) C. Consider next the absence of do in embedded interrogatives with a subject gap in BE, as in (13g). When the interrogative involves an object gap, do-support is poss- ible, as in (13f). This is a typical case of subject/object asymmetry. In the embedded interrogative in (13g) the subject moves locally and do is blocked, in the same way that do is blocked in subject matrix interrogatives. The pair in (16a-b) illustrates this pattern, and contrasts with the obligatory presence of do in object questions (cf. 16~): (16) a. Who kissed Mary? b. *Who did kiss Mary? c. Who did John kiss? Koopman (1983) and Rizzi (1990) attribute the ungrammaticality of (16b) to an ECP violation, i.e. some sort of a Comp-trace effect, the idea being that a lexical C cannot properly govern the subject trace in Spec,TP (IP in their analyses). The question is how the Q-feature is realized, and how C becomes a proper governor. Proper government is satisfied in the same way as in complement clauses: the sub- ject in Spec,CP triggers agreement between C and T, yielding the zero form of C. This mechanism also satisfies the Q-feature of C. According to Rizzi (1991) the Q- feature in English resides in T (I in his analysis). Agreement in C has the effect of carrying the relevant feature to C. In other words, local movement of the subject is sufficient to ‚move™ Q to C, and do-support is not necessary, and therefore does not take place. In fact it cannot, as the presence of do would block head-government. The idea that local movement of the subject also satisfies a feature of C has been suggested in more recent analyses as well (cf. Roussou, 1996; Pesetsky and Tor- rego, in press). Let us now try to implement this idea within the current set of assumptions. As before, suppose we™ve reached that point in the derivation where T is merged. The phi-features of T require lexicalization (the EPP), but there is no DP available. C,, on the other hand, fulfills this requirement, on the assumption that it also realizes A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 21 the feature content of T. Up to this point then the derivation proceeds exactly as in subject extraction out of an embedded clause. The question though is how Q is sat- isfied. Recall that in the present analysis we have dissociated these two features, i.e. wh and Q. The former is realized by merger of the wh-phrase in Spec,CP, the latter by an auxiliary in C, a realization that has to be excluded though when the wh-phrase corresponds to the subject. The alternative is to say, as in the analysis above, that the realization of Q in this context is ‚parasitic™ on that of the wh-phrase. To be more precise Q can be satisfied locally via the Agree relation between the subject wh- phrase and T (more precisely Agr), in the same way that the realization of Agr is ‚parasitic™ on the C-T relation. This is achieved in the following way: the operation Agree relates who to C due to the wh-feature, and to T due to Agr. It also relates C and T in terms of finiteness. The Q-feature, as a property of the proposition, is also part of the C-T relation. Given that the wh-phrase Agrees with both C and T in this case, it can also indirectly express the C-T relation. To be more precise, the zero form of C allows for the realization not only of Agr but of the C-T relation as well. Thus the wh-element can indirectly realize Q as well. On the other hand, do spells- out Q, a feature associated with C and T, but fails to realize Agr, and is therefore less preferred.™ This happens in subject extraction only, as objects do not relate to T, and therefore cannot express properties of the C-T system. The same account extents to embedded interrogatives with a subject gap, as in the BE example in (13g), as well as in SE. SE and BE differ in that the latter does otherwise allow for do-support in embedded interrogatives, while the former blocks it in any case. I will not provide an account of this parametric difference in the present paper, as this would take us too ™ There is perhaps more that needs to be said in this context. The absence of an auxiliary in subject questions is obvious when do is involved. However, it is not so obvious when other auxiliaries, such as ha\,e and he for example, are present. So the sentence below could have the following two representa- tions: (i) a. Who has kissed Mary™? b. [(.,, Who [,i, has [,p kissed Mary]]] c. [c,, Who has [,,, T [vp kissed Mary]]] It is not so easy to determine which of the two is the correct one, unless we have a principled explana- tion (cf. Koopman, 1983; Rizzi, 1990) that rules out the second option. On the empirical side, it is possible to find examples which indicate that the auxiliary has moved to C. Interestingly the auxiliary do is also possible in this case: (ii) a. Who has for all intents and purposes kissed Mary™? b. ?Who did for all intents and purposes kiss Mary? On the basis of these data, we could argue that the representation in (ic) is indeed possible. If this is cor- rect then the unavailability of do-support in the example in the text should be attributed to some other factor, most likely the properties of do. Notice in this connection that, unlike the other auxiliaries, do is not independently attested as the realization of T, unless it is associated with negation, or question, or focus. Perhaps then do could be taken as an auxiliary that relates to the realization of a Focus feature, on the assumption that the above features can be collapsed into one. If this is correct, then the absence of do-support in matrix subject questions needs to be slightly revised. Assuming that wh-phrases are essen- tially focused (cf. Rizzi, 1997 for a more recent account), and that the wh-subject relates to T due to its phi-features, then it is only in this case where the wh-phrase can realize both the C-T relation as well as the focus property. I will not discuss this issue further as it requires a more detailed account of do-sup- port in English. 28 A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 far afield.x In any case, the account provided for the lack of do-support does not dif- fer in substance from the one proposed by Rizzi (1991) (but see footnote 7). It dif- fers, however, in terms of the actual formulation, as it has no recourse to proper gov- ernment. Having discussed the different realizations of the C-T relation in SE and BE in more detail, let us now focus on the content of C,,. Consider the example in (17), which involves no subject gap: (17) I think [cp (that) Peter has won the prize]. There are two crucial points we need to make with respect to (17). First, the DP Peter realizes the set of phi-features of T, thus satisfying its EPP-property. Second, the auxiliary has is present, spelling out T. Restricting our attention to the that-less version of (17) it is natural to question the feature content of Co in this case. Is it dif- ferent from the one we find in subject extraction, and if so, in what way? Pesetsky and Torrego (in press) argue that that is an instance of T-to-C move- ment, triggered by the uninterpretable T-feature of C. When that is absent the DP subject (or its copy, as in subject extraction) is in Spec,CP checking the uninter- pretable T-feature of C (on the assumption that the DP also bears an uninterpretable T-feature, realized as nominative case). When that is present, on the other hand, the subject remains in Spec,TP. Thus in their analysis the subject may occur in two dif- ferent positions. The first question is whether there is an interpretative difference, depending on where the subject occurs. The answer appears to be negative, although one would have expected it to be otherwise, given that T and C have different prop- erties. The second problem concerns subject relatives, which despite the local move- ment of the subject to Spec,CP also require that (an anti-that-t effect), as shown in (18a) and (18b): (18) a. The man *(that) left is my friend. b. LDP the lcp man that lTP tlllilr, Trhat left 111 Let us assume that the subject man moves from Spec,TP to Spec,CP, following Kayne (1994) (the null operator analysis would do as well). Then the DP man is in a position to check the uninterpretable T-feature of C. On this basis one would expect that to be redundant by Economy, and therefore unavailable. However, as (18a) shows that must be present. In terms of the analysis suggested in the present paper, that is merged in C and man in Spec,CP. Agree establishes a relation between that and man, as well as a relation between man and T, and that and T. There are two possible ways to proceed. One is to say that the NP man directly lexicalizes the x Pesetsky and Totrego (in press) reduce this difference to the absence of an EPP-feature for the unin- terpretable T-feature of embedded interrogative C in English. Adapting their analysis to present terms, we would say that the Q-feature does not require lexicalization in this case. However, this leaves the presence of if(e.g. I wonder ifJohn left) in embedded interrogatives unaccounted for. On the other hand, ~#trthe~ can be accommodated on the assumption that it is in Spec,CP in any case. A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 29 Agr-features in C (Spec,CP). In particular, it directly lexicalizes the phi-features of Agr, while the head of the DP provides the D-feature (via the D-C relation). The other alternative is to say that that in relative clauses can carry agreement, due to the presence of the NP in its spec (cf. Bianchi, 1999; Roussou, 1996). I will not choose between these two options. It simply suffices to say that (18) presents a potential problem for the Pesetsky and Torrego (in press) analysis regarding the complemen- tary distribution of that and the subject in Spec,CP. The third problem has to do with the idea that that actually moves to C. As Peset- sky and Torrego (in press) argue, that doubles T; this is a case of movement where both heads are pronounced. They also argue that in some dialects T-to-C movement takes the form of an auxiliary, as is the case in BE. In other words, a&support in embedded clauses and that are facets of the same phenomenon. However, if that were correct, one would predict that do-support in BE is found in those contexts that allow for that in SE, contrary to fact. Recall from the discussion of the data in (13) that do-support is possible when the embedded declarative is an extraction domain, or when the complement clause is an embedded interrogative, but not otherwise. In particular, do is not found optionally in examples analogous to (17). Thus the analy- sis of T-to-C movement in the form of that-raising does not seem to receive much empirical support from auxiliary movement to C in other dialects. In the present analysis, that is directly merged in C and forms a relation with T under Agree. Thus there is no reason to assume movement of that, since Agree suf- fices to establish the relevant syntactic relation between the two heads. The question then is what happens with the zero form of C in a non-extraction context, as in (17). Recall from our discussion in the previous section that there is no separate operation Move. Instead lexical items are directly merged in the position where they surface, and from that position they relate to other elements in the structure. Co was also interpreted as the realization of the feature content of T in C. In other words, what we have in this case is a morpheme that carries T- and Agr-features and is used as an alternative realization of C along with that. In connection to this, Rizzi (1997) argues that Co is specified for Finiteness and optionally Agr. Finiteness is then the property relevant for the relation with T. For Rizzi (1997), however, Agr is optional to the extent that it is triggered by an intermediate trace. In the present analysis, however, there is no intermediate trace/copy present. Instead Co lexicalizes Agr via the C-T relation, in the absence of a DP-subject. Consider next briefly the distribu- tion of C,, and that which in most contexts are in free variation. At the same time, that is excluded in subject extraction out of complement clauses, while it is required in subject relatives, as already discussed above. It is also required when the finite clause occurs in subject position, as in (19): (19) *(That) Peter won the prize surprised everyone. Their different distribution can be accounted for on the basis that that and Co have distinct feature content: that, unlike Co, does not carry agreement, but spells out finiteness and clause typing (cf. Rizzi™s, 1997, Force). Tentatively, we could also say that that is a deictic (D-like) element, which establishes an anaphoric relation 30 A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 between two clauses (cf. Pesetsky and Torrego, in press: note 41; Roussou, 2000). Perhaps it is this property that is responsible for the obligatory presence of that in (finite) subject clauses, as in (19). We leave this alternative open here. The third realization of C (in Standard English) is by means of an auxiliary, which is used to spell-out both the C- and the T-heads (as in typical cases of movement). The auxil- iary lexicalizes not only the T-head but C as well, and in particular the Q-feature of C. This is supported by the fact that that and auxiliary inversion are in complemen- tary distribution in SE. I0 Going back to C,, note that the feature content of C in this case doubles that of T. Thus I differ from Pesetsky and Ton-ego (in press) who take that to double T. If the proposed analysis is on the right track, then there is no need to distinguish between two C,,s depending on whether subject extraction has taken place or not. Instead I have argued for the presence of a single zero C in both con- texts. The main difference is that while in subject extraction C, provides a lexical- ization for Agr as well, in non-extraction this is not the case, as there is a DP avail- able to fulfill this role. Having considered the different realizations of the C-T relation in Standard and Belfast English, I will next turn to the properties and the interpretation of the subject, focusing on embedded clauses mainly. 4. C and the subject It was argued in Section 2 that the Agr-features of (finite) T in English need to be lexicalized by a DP. When subject extraction takes place, there is no DP available to spell out these features, since the wh-phrase that corresponds to the subject is directly merged in Spec,CP. The derivation converges when Co is present, on the assumption that this form of C is the instantiation of the feature content of T (and Agr) in C. This way, Agr is satisfied albeit via the C-T relation. Bearing this in mind, let us now consider the example in (19) below: (20) a. *I think I& has won the prize]. b. I think [cp C-Agr-T [TP has won the prize]] c. I think [cp C [TP he has won the prize]]. The analysis suggested so far raises the following problem: if Co satisfies Agr, as shown in (20b), why is (20a) ungrammatical? In other words, if this option is avail- able in English, why doesn™t the derivation in (20a) converge? In terms of the present analysis, (20a) should be grammatical, contrary to fact. Instead the derivation converges only when there is a DP-subject present, as in (20~). Recall from our discussion in Section 2 that the DP in Spec,TP not only lexical- izes Agr, thus satisfying the EPP, but also values the features associated with Agr. In lo It is possible to argue that do and Co are not really in complementary distribution, unlike that and do. This could perhaps account for the case of subject extraction, i.e. ‚Who leff?' (thanks to Ian Roberts for pointing this out to me). I leave this possibility open. A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 31 (20~) for example the pronoun he fixes the value of Agr as 3rd singular (masculine). The actual reference of he is determined contextually due to the pronominal nature of the DP in this case. Regarding subject extraction out of a complement clause, we argued that although Agr is lexicalized via the C-T relation, it is valued as part of the wh-dependency, hence its interpretation as a variable bound by the wh-operator. The example in (20a) represents a rather different case, as there is no operator present which Agr could link to. Thus the variable interpretation of Agr is excluded. In the absence of an operator-variable dependency, an alternative reading for Agr is in principle available, namely that of a pronominal. However, as the ungrammaticality of (20a) shows, the pronominal interpretation of Agr is blocked. The problem with respect to (20a) can thus be summarized as follows: although Agr is lexicalized via C, as in subject extraction, it fails to be valued. The absence of a valuation mech- anism makes the derivation crash at LF, on the basis that Agr cannot receive an interpretation. Crucially, however, the derivation in this case converges at PF due to the fact that Agr succeeds in being lexicalized. So the C-T relation can lexicalize Agr, but cannot determine its interpretation. The problem in (20a) then is restricted to the LF properties of Agr, unlike the ‚[hat-t effect™, which has to do with its lexi- calization (PF); in the latter case Agr receives an interpretation in association with the wh-phrase (i.e. that of a variable). Notice that the option of a pronominal reading for Agr in connection with C and in the absence of a DP is not a priori excluded. Indeed this is the typical case of ‚pro-drop™ under V2, i.e. the availability of a null subject when T has moved to C (cf. Adams, 1987; Roberts, 1993: chapter 2, for Old French; Vanelli et al., 1985; Manzini and Savoia, 1998a, for Italian dialects, among others). The examples below from Old French (OF) (Roberts, 1993: 124) illustrate this point: (2 1) a. Tresque™en la mer cunquist la tere altaigne. until the sea conquered (he) the land high ‚He conquered the high land all the way to the sea.™ b. por vos sui en prison misse. for you am (I) in prison put ‚I have been put in prison for you.™ In standard terms, the null subject in (2 1) is represented as a pro-element in Spec,TP. According to Rizzi (1986a), pro must be licensed and identified. Licensing takes the form of proper head government (subject to the usual parametric variation). Recover- ability of the content of pro (identification) is also derived from its governor, namely from the head pro is coindexed with. For example, Agr in typical null-subject lan- guages like Italian both licenses and identifies pro. With respect to OF, Roberts (1993) argues that T-to-C movement creates the right configuration so that C can properly govern pro in Spec,TP, and identify its features. We then see that the distri- bution of pro is also subject to licensing in the form of proper government, in a way similar to the licensing of traces (the ECP). The feature content (identification) of pro, on the other hand, depends on that of its head governor, while for traces it is deter- mined via their antecedent. As already mentioned in relation to subject extraction, 32 A. Roussou I Lingua I12 (2002) 13-52 the distinction between proper and non-proper governors is dispensed with in the Minimalist framework. Thus the distribution of pro in terms of government becomes problematic, since it is incompatible with current minimalist assumptions. To be more precise, the postulation of pro as a distinct syntactic entity that requires special conditions of licensing and identification turns out to be difficult to maintain. In the discussion of subject extraction in Section 2, I argued that the ‚licensing™ condition corresponds to the PF-property of Agr, and in particular to its lexicaliza- tion. The same line of reasoning can extend to the licensing of pro, which reduces to lexicalization (or not) of Agr in the absence of a DP in Spec,TP. The crucial differ- ence involves the interpretation of Agr, which in this case corresponds to a pronom- inal, while in the extraction context it corresponds to a variable. If this is correct, then we can dispense with pro as a syntactic entity, in accordance with recent claims in the literature (see Borer, 1986; Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou, 1998, on exple- tive pro; Manzini and Savoia (in press) on expletive and referential pro, among others). Within this frame of assumptions the absence of a DP-subject in (21) becomes straightforward: the presence of T in C allows for the indirect realization of Agr. It is worth pointing out that OF, like English, also requires merger of a DP in T to satisfy the EPP. In other words, Agr in OF is lexicalized and valued by a DP. When the verb occurs in C, this option is suspended, to the extent that lexicalization is achieved via the C-T relation, as in subject extraction in English. However, OF, unlike English, permits a pronominal interpretation for Agr in this context. In other words the C-T relation in OF not only lexicalizes Agr, but also contributes to its val- uation/interpretation. Thus although lexicalization proceeds in the same way in both grammars, only OF converges in terms of LF-interpretability, while English does so in the context of extraction only and not otherwise (but see the discussion on non- finite complements that follows). In order to solve this problem let us pay closer attention to the possible ways of lexicalizing Agr and how this may relate to its valuation. As already argued, in Eng- lish Agr is spelled out by merging a DP. In typical null-subject languages, like Stan- dard Italian, an agreement affix is present on the predicate (cf. Rizzi, 1982). It is also possible to find a subject clitic, which may or may not be doubled by an agreement affix, as is the case in Northern Italian dialects (Brandi and Cordin, 1989; Poletto, 2000; Manzini and Savoia, in press). The three cases are illustrated in (22) below (see also Roberts and Roussou, in press): (22) a. *(She) speaks b. Parla speak-3sg c. La parla she speak-3sg (English) (Standard Italian) (Fiorentino) Following Davis™ (2000) terminology, we could say that English Agr is spelled out ‚syntagmatically™, while Agr in null and subject clitic languages is spelled out ‚para- digmatically™, i.e. there is an inflectional paradigm that lexicalizes Agr. In English, on the other hand, this paradigm is defective, and merger of a full DP is the only way A. Roussou I Lingua I12 (2002) 13-52 33 to realize Agr. There is one more option, represented by languages like Chinese, which involves absence of any lexicalization of Agr. In this case there is neither an inflectional paradigm (agreement affixes or clitics), nor an obligatorily DP present, as shown in (23) (Huang, 1989: 187): (23) a. ta kanjan ta le. he see he perf. ‚He saw him.™ b. kanjan ta le. see he perf. ‚I/you/he/. . . saw him.™ Given that the pronoun ta is not obligatory in (23), unlike English (22a), we could say that Agr in Chinese does not require lexicalization. In terms of the analysis pro- posed here, Chinese has no EPP feature associated with Agr/T.ﬂ Consider next how Agr is valued cross-linguistically. In English, valuation of Agr is achieved via the DP that also lexicalizes Agr (leaving subject extraction aside for the moment). In Standard Italian (a null-subject language) it is derived by the agree- ment affix on the predicate, while in the Northern Italian dialects (subject-clitic lan- guages) by means of the pronominal clitic. In null-subject and subject-clitic lan- guages the features of Agr can be interpreted pronominally. If there is a DP-subject present as well, then the reference of Agr is determined in association with the DP: the operation Agree connects Agr with the DP, which occurs in a peripheral position (see footnote 10). If there is no DP present, the reference of Agr is determined by a discourse prominent antecedent. The situation in Chinese, on the other hand, is slightly different, as there is no inflection in the form of an affix or a clitic that would value Agr. At the same time the DP-subject is not obligatory, unlike English, thus the only way to derive an interpretation for Agr, in the absence of a DP, is to link it directly to a discourse antecedent (cf. Huang, 1989). Davis (2000) argues that referential identification presupposes phi-identification. Considering null-subject languages of the Italian type, the claim is that inflection mediates between Agr and the discourse antecedent; the latter transmits its features to Agr via the verbal inflec- tion. In syntactic terms, this is achieved by LF-movement of T to C. In terms of the present analysis there is no need to postulate covert movement, as the syntactic oper- ation Agl-ee establishes the C-T relation in any case. The head C is relevant, pre- sumably due to the fact that it interacts with the discourse-oriented properties of the clause. This relation is necessary for the reference and phi-identification of 3rd per- son Agr, as 1st and 2nd person directly identify with the speaker and hearer in the discourse. Going back to the data under consideration, we can say that English and Chinese represent the most clear cases: the former values Agr via the DP that also spells out Agr, while the latter does so through the discourse antecedent. inflectional ﬂ If this is correct, 1 will have to assume that when there is a DP-subject present, this does not occur in Spec,TP, but in some other position. such as Topic for example. This in facr has been argued for DP- subjects in null-subject and clitic-subject languages (see the references in the text). 34 A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 languages are a case in between, given that valuation is indirect, i.e. by the media- tion of inflection (clitic or affix); this of course is in accordance with the standard assumption regarding the pronominal character of (subject) inflection in these lan- guages (cf. Chomsky, 1981; Rizzi, 1982). Bearing the above points in mind, let us go back to the contrast between the gram- matical OF construction in (21) and the ungrammatical English one in (20a). As already mentioned, while OF allows for a pronominal interpretation of Agr when T is in C, English doesn™t. It is important to note that in both grammars Agr requires lex- icalization by merging a DP. In present terms both grammars have an EPP-property, which is satisfied by merger of a DP. Earlier on in the discussion, I assumed that this option takes place when there is a defective inflectional paradigm, thus contrasting with languages like Chinese which simply have no paradigm (cf. Davis, 2000). The English inflectional system is severely reduced, as the only inflectional specification is found in the 3rd person singular, present tense. In all other cases, there is a zero morpheme that realizes lst, 2nd singular, and all persons in the plural. English then has a highly syncretic inflectional system. OF, on the other hand, differs as it exhibits a lesser degree of syncretism in its inflectional paradigm. Roberts (1993: 125) cites the following OF paradigm (for the -er conjugation in the present tense): (24) chant, chantes, chante(r), chantons, chantez, chantent sing-lsg, sing-2sg, sing-3sg, sing-lpl, sing-2p1, sing-3pl According to (24), there are 6 distinct endings, including the zero ending for 1st sin- gular. These endings were further reduced to three, after eliminating final -s, -t, and -nt, and adding -e in 1st singular. 1st and 2nd plural maintained their ending. At the same time, OF differs from Standard Italian, since despite the presence of a para- digm it still requires a DP. The above difference can by accounted for by assuming that verbal agreement in OF has a doubling effect. In other words, it does not directly lexicalize the features of Agr, but simply doubles them. Agreement affixes in Standard Italian, on the other hand, can be taken to resume (i.e. directly lexicalize) the features of Agr (cf. Tsim- pli, 1997). If this is correct, then the different properties of the Agr system in OF and Standard Italian can be accounted for in terms of a ‚doubling™ vs. ‚resumption™ mechanism. Let us next see how this property of OF relates to the lexicalization and valuation of Agr in V2 contexts, i.e. with V in C and no DP in Spec,TP. When V is in C it takes along its agreement affix, on the assumption that affixes cannot be stranded, but have to be pied-piped. In standard movement terms, V on its way to C passes through T and succeeds in lexicalizing the Agr features of T, which are now carried over to C. In present terms, V in C lexicalizes not only C but T as well, and therefore the Agr-features of T. Given that OF makes use of a paradigm, once V/T is in C, inflection can mediate and fix the interpretation of Agr as well. The avail- ability of a pronominal reading for Agr is thus derived through the C-T relation. In other words, while inflection on its own is not sufficient to value Agr, assuming that it simply doubles the features of the DP, it can do so in association with C, as a by-product of the C-T relation. A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 35 Consider English next. As already mentioned, a pronominal reading for Agr is blocked, although English like OF satisfies the EPP by merger of a DP in Spec,TP. The first difference has to do with the fact that the inflectional paradigm of English is severely defective compared to that of OF, rendering valuation of Agr difficult in principle. A further difference stems from the fact that while OF is a V2 lan- guage, English is residually V2. Being fully V2, OF allows for the presence of V in C to spell out the C-T Agree relation which is based on finiteness. The presence of a V element, that is an auxiliary, in C in English, on the other hand, does not spell out finiteness, but the Q-feature, as argued in detail in Section 3. Moreover, while in OF it can be the main verb that is realized in C, this is excluded in the rel- evant contexts in English. In standard terms this is partly related to the fact that English has not V-to-T movement, while OF does. Thus the only verbal elements that can occur in C are auxiliaries. The lack of V movement to T has also been attributed to the defective inflectional paradigm of English (cf. Roberts, 1993; Vikner, 1997; Rohrbacher, 1999). How exactly inflectional morphology and the position of the verb interact need not concern us here. What is relevant is the fact that the verb along with its agreement affix cannot move to C. In other words, V in English cannot spell out T and C. The auxiliary can, but then it is restricted to Q, as English is not fully V2. Recall from our discussion in Sections 2 and 3 that Co in declaratives is the realization of the feature content of T (and Agr) in C. In other words, it is the content of T that lexicalizes C as well as Agr in this case. However, although lexicalization succeeds, inflection in C cannot mediate to fix the value of Agr, so that the latter is interpreted as a pronominal, as in OF. This of course does not mean that Agr cannot receive any interpretation. As I showed in Section 2, Agr in this configuration can receive an interpretation, namely that of a variable, through a syntactic relation with an operator. As I will show shortly, a number of other interpretations may be available in this configuration although in non-finite contexts. To summarize so far, I have argued that the difference between OF and English regarding the pronominal character of Agr in a ‚V2™ context is attributed to a num- ber of reasons. For example, differences in the inflectional paradigm, the absence of V-to-T movement, as well as the residual V2 character of English. The advantage of the present analysis is that it succeeds in providing a unified analysis of two other- wise unrelated phenomena, namely subject extraction and ‚pro-drop™ under V2. In standard GB terms, although these two constructions are treated alike with respect to the configuration that involves C and the subject, they also differ, as the subject pos- ition is occupied by separate syntactic entities, namely a trace and a pro respectively. In current terms the similarities follow from the C-T relation and the lexicalization of Agr through this relation (which further reduces to the EPP). The differences fol- low directly from the properties of Agr, with no need of postulating entities such as traces and pro along with the special licensing conditions they require. To this end, the contrast between OF and English was attributed to the different interpretations assigned to Agr, which in OF can be derived paradigmatically once in the right con- figuration, while in English it cannot. Thus while OF allows for a pronominal Agr in this context, English doesn™t; instead it requires that the interpretation of Agr 36 A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 be supplied from somewhere else, hence the availability of a variable reading in a wh-dependency. Before I conclude the discussion in the present section, it is worth discussing the relation between C and Agr in non-finite contexts. Consider the following examples: (25) a. John tried [to win the prize]. b. It is easy [to win the prize]. c. [cp C-Agr-T [rP tAgr_T to win the prize]] (25a) is a typical case of control: the embedded subject is interpreted as coreferen- tial with the matrix one. Manzini and Roussou (2000) argue that control reduces to an Agree relation between two thematic roles with one DP. Arbitrary control of the type exhibited in (25) arises when the embedded thematic role is associated via Agree with an operator in C (via the T-head). Borer (1989) and more recently Lan- dau (2000) argue that in control contexts the embedded Agr raises to C from where it becomes associated with the matrix subject, as shown in (2%). Savoia and Manzini (in prep.) also relate all instances of control to C, arguing that the availabil- ity of coreference with a matrix argument is derived on the basis of the semantic properties of the matrix predicate. Despite the different implementations, what all the above approaches have in common is the idea that Agr and C relate somehow. I will not attempt to provide a full account of control phenomena here, as this is beyond the scope of the present paper (but see the above references). It is important to note though that if these analyses are on the right track, then the schema in (25~) essentially iterates the configuration established for subject extraction in English and pronominal Agr in OF. Restricting our attention to the examples in (25) we can say that the Agr-features of the embedded non-finite T are lexicalized via the C-T relation, again attributed to the relation between embedded C and T, as well as the matrix T in the case of con- trol. Via the embedded C, Agr can be associated with a matrix argument, yielding subject or object control (subject to minimality, cf. Manzini and Roussou, 2000). In the absence of an appropriate argument, Agr is interpreted in association with C, and in particular the modal operator residing in C, yielding arbitrary control, as in (25b). Notice that in this case C also has the zero form. This comes as no surprise on the assumption that the zero morpheme allows for the realization of Agr as well. It is also interesting to note that the presence of a lexical complementizer, such as fir-, blocks control and forces the presence of a DP-subject, as shown below: (26) a. John prefers for you to win the prize. b. *John prefers for to win the prize. c. *Who do you prefer for to win the prize? As (26a) shows fir induces the presence of a lexical subject, which in turn realizes the Agr-features of T. When for is present, control is not possible on the assumption that a lexical C blocks the realization of T-Agr in C (cf. 26b). The derivation crashes, as Agr fails to receive a PF-realization (see Henry, 1995, on the for to construction A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 31 in BE). The same effect holds for extraction, as shown in (26~). Thus the comple- mentizerfor has the same effect as that in this context. To conclude, in the present section I have considered the relation between C and Agr in more detail. I argued that the C-T relation can also derive the lexicalization of Agr, yielding a null subject. The interpretation of Agr depends on a number of other reasons. Thus in OF a pronominal interpretation is possible, while in English finite clauses it is blocked. In the latter case only the variable reading of Agr is avail- able. In non-finite contexts, Agr via C can be interpreted in association with a matrix argument (anaphoric), yielding the typical cases of control. In the absence of an appropriate ‚controller™, Agr is interpreted in connection with the operator properties of C, giving rise to an arbitrary interpretation. Finally, the complementizerfor blocks control and extraction, exactly like that in extraction contexts. 5. The parameterization of subject extraction So far I have considered subject extraction in English, and have provided a detailed account of the C-T relation as well as the properties of Agr (lexicalization and valuation). It was also argued that the effects of the ECP can be captured in min- imalist terms, as conditions that relate to the two interfaces. Thus licensing relates to the PF-interface, while identification relates to LF. The same was argued to hold for pro, which is now dispensed with, under current assumptions. In the conjunctive ECP (Rizzi, 1990) the set of proper governors was subject to parametric variation, while identification was always derived via antecedent government. Restricting our attention to subject extraction, and bearing in mind that ‚licensing™ reduces to a PF- property of the Agr-features, we expect to find that the parametric variation associ- ated with subject extraction is due to the different ways Agr is lexicalized. In what follows I will illustrate this with a few standard cases. 5.1. The C-strategy Starting with English, it was argued in Section 2 that when the subject is realized as a wh-phrase in the matrix Spec,CP, the embedded Agr-features cannot be spelled out, unless C takes a special form, namely C,,. A similar effect is found in Danish, as the example below (Vikner, 1995: 121, fn. 30) illustrates: (27) Hvem tror du (*at) vi1 kobe den her bog? Who think you that will buy this here book ‚Who do you think will buy this book? ™ According to (27) subject extraction is possible to the extent that the lexical comple- mentizer at is absent. Note that Danish is like English in other respects as well: it lacks V-to-T movement and requires that a DP-subject be present (in finite clauses). Unlike English, however, it is a full V2-language in root clauses, as in (28a), and unlike German it allows for embedded V2 (in cases of topicalization) along with the 38 A.RoussoulLingua 112 (2002)13-52 lexical C at. In fact at has to be present, as the example in (28b) shows (examples from Vikner, 1995: 39, 67). In that respect, embedded V2 in Danish is reminiscent of embedded topicalization in English (cf. 28c), which also requires that: (28) a. Denne bog har Peter last. this book has Peter read.ﬂ ‚Peter has read this book.™ b. Vi ved *(at) denne bog har Bo ikke laest. we know-lp that this book has Bo not read ‚We know that Bo has not read this book.™ c. I think *(that) under no circumstances would John see this film. As the examples in (28) show, Danish behaves like German in root contexts, but like English in embedded ones. Vikner (199.5: 85) analyzes embedded V2 in Danish in terms of CP-recursion with at in the higher C and the verb in the lower one. Fol- lowing Rizzi™s (1997) terminology regarding the split C-system, we can take the higher C to correspond to Force (typical clause-typing properties), and the lower one to Fin. Thus at occupies Force, while the verb is in Fin. The same seems to hold for that in (28~). The incompatibility of German with embedded V2 indicates that both the verb and the lexical complementizer dafl occupy the same position (cf. den Besten, 1983), presumably the lower C (Fin) head. This pattern is illustrated in (29) below: (29) a. [rorceP atlthaj [rinr Fin [IP 1 . . ..I11 b. [rorceP Force lFlnP d&l [IP 1 . . . .I11 The structures in (29) yield the right results with respect to the distribution of lexical C™s and T-movement, as well as the difference between German and Danish despite their V2-property. If the structure in (29a) is correct, however, it raises a serious problem for the cur- rent analysis of subject extraction. To be more precise, if we accept the split C-struc- ture of Rizzi (1997) and assume that at/that are in the higher C (Force), then there should be no that-t effect. as the feature content of T could still be present in the lower C (Fin). In other words, given the structure in (29a), it™s hard to predict the interference of that with subject extraction. Faced with this problem, Rizzi (1997) argues that that is specified as [+declarative], but optionally [+finite], while C,, is [+finite] and optionally [+declarative], [+Agr]. On the basis of its feature specifica- tion, that moves from Fin to Force. In topicalization and negative inversion, that obligatorily realizes Force, as other phrasal projections intervene between Fin and Force, creating a minimality effect for the movement of that from one C-head to the next. So in this context that only realizes Force. In subject extraction, the Co is selected as it also allows for the realization of agreement, which is triggered by the intermediate trace in Spec, FinP. Let us assume that Rizzi™s (1997) analysis regarding the feature specification of that is basically correct: that is a clause-typing element (declarative) sensitive to A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 39 finiteness (cf. its exclusion from infinitival complements), as shown in Section 3 as well. In present terms, that is directly merged in the higher C (Force) from where it forms an Agree relation with the lower C (Fin) and through that with T. We can also assume that given the Agree relation between the two C-heads, the feature content of that lexicalizes the lower C as well (standardly captured as movement from the lower to the higher C). In this case the presence of (the feature content of) T in Fin is blocked, and that becomes incompatible with subject extraction as it leaves Agr unrealized. Co, on the other hand, carries features associated with the lower C (Fin). Once again, in the absence of that and given Agree, C,, can also realize features as- sociated with the higher C (Force) (in standard terms it moves). When other (opera- tor) material intervenes, such as topics or negative phrases, the two C heads get dis- tinct realizations: in movement terms, that cannot move from Fin to Force (possibly due to minimality). This is precisely what we have in (28~). The same account can extend to the Danish at (cf. 28b). Thus although Danish is a V2-language, the lexi- cal C at is compatible with T-movement in the case of embedded topicalization, sim- ply because at can occur in a higher C-head. When there is a subject gap, the only option available is to have C,,, exactly as in English, so that the Agr-features are lex- icalized. As expected, the lexical C at is excluded in this case, hence the grammati- cal version of (27) without at. The split C-system outlined above has further implications for subject extraction: we expect to find cases where that is present in the higher C (Force) and subject extraction is licit. There are two cases at hand: (a) the English dialects which do not exhibit that-t effects (and furthermore do not allow for a null subject), and (b) the absence of a ‚that-t™ effect when certain adverbs intervene between that and the sub- ject gap. Let us start with the first case. It has been pointed out in the literature that in some English dialects, (30a) with that present is grammatical, while (30b) with if is not (Sobin, 1987): (30) a. Who do you think that kissed Mary? b. *Who do you wonder if kissed Mary? Rizzi (1990) argues that in these dialects that is a proper governor, i.e. it can carry abstract agreement features, while if is not, exactly as in SE. This account of course has to stipulate that that in this case is a proper governor. In terms of the present analysis, the contrast in (30) can be accommodated along the following lines: in the relevant dialects that lexicalizes only Force and not Fin (but see Branigan, 1996, for a different view). On the other hand, if is like that in Standard English, realizing both Fin and Force. Due to absence of further empirical support regarding the distribution of that (and if, in these dialects, the proposed account for the contrast in (30a) in relation to the extraction pattern can only be taken to hold tentatively. The next case has to do with the interaction of subject extraction and adverbials. As noted by Culicover (1993) (originally attributed to Bresnan, 1977) and discussed in subsequent work by Branigan (1996), Browning (1996), and Rizzi (1997), the ‚that-t™ effect is voided when an adverbial expression intervenes between that and the subject gap: 40 A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 (31) a. Who did Leslie say that *(for all intents and purposes) was the mayor of the city? b. Who did Leslie say that *(under no circumstances) would run for any pub- lic office? (3 1 a) involves an embedded topic, while (3 1 b) involves embedded negative prepos- ing. Culicover (1993) argues that the above data favor the filter analysis of the ‚that- t effect™, as opposed to the ECP one. Browning (1996) and Rizzi (1997) instead argue that the adverbial effect is compatible with an ECP-approach, once we assume a more fully-fledged CP-structure. I2 In terms of the analysis just outlined above, the presence of a TopicP/FocusP between Force and Fin restricts that in Force (under minimality), allowing for the feature content of T to be present in Fin, thus realizing Agr as well. In other words, that in this case only lexicalizes Force, while Fin is lex- icalized by the zero morpheme.ﬂ In the present section I showed how the C-strategy is used in subject extraction in languages like English and Danish. Following the split C-system, I provided an account of those English dialects that allow for subject extraction in the presence of that, by taking that to lexicalize the higher C-head. Within this context, I also pro- vided an account of the ‚adverbial effect™ very much as in Rizzi (1997), without though resorting on head government. 5.2. Null-subject and subject-clitic languages It is well known that by and large null-subject languages like Standard Italian and Greek (cf. 32a and 32b respectively) do not show any ‚that-t™ effects (cf. Perlmutter, 1971; Rizzi, 1982): (32) a. Chi credi the abbia telefonato? Who think-2s that has telephoned b. Pjos nomizis oti tilefonise? Who think-2s that telephoned ‚Who do you think called? ™ Rizzi (1982) argues that in these languages extraction takes place from a postverbal position, while the canonical subject position (Spec,TP) is occupied by an expletive pro (cf. also Rizzi, 1990). T properly governs the subject trace inside VP, and the that-t effect simply does not arise, since there is no trace, but pro, adjacent to C. ﬂ Notice that topicalized arguments do not void that-t effects: (i) *Who did John say that, this present, gave to Mary? (ii) *What did John say that, to Mary, he should give? As (i) and (ii) show this is not specific to subject extraction: the result is ungrammatical even if object extraction is at stake. See Browning (I 996) and Rizzi (I 997) for discussion of these data. ‚I As shown in note 4, negative phrases in English may trigger subject-auxiliary inversion. When the subject is extracted though, do-support cannot take place (or more generally the auxiliary cannot be real- ized in the lower C). As already discussed in section 3 this is due to the fact that do spells out a Q or Focus feature in C. thus preventing the realization of Agr. A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 41 In the previous section I discussed the properties of pro and its elimination in cur- rent theorizing. I also argued that Agr in this case is lexicalized by means of the agreement affix attached on the verb, which also values the phi-features of Agr due to its pronominal nature. The actual reference of Agr is fixed in association with a discourse antecedent. In other words, Agr is (partly) valued and lexicalized paradig- matically. Let us see how this works in the case of extraction. Recall from our dis- cussion in Section 2 that lexical items are directly merged in the position where they surface; thus the wh-phrases chi in (32a) and p&s in (32b) are directly merged in the matrix Spec,CP. The embedded Agr is lexicalized in the usual way by means of the agreement affix, which also values its phi-features. However, in this case Agr is not interpreted as a pronominal whose reference is fixed by the discourse via the media- tion of inflection. Instead it is interpreted as a variable, on the basis that Agr enters an Agree relation with the wh-phrase in the matrix Spec,CP which needs to be syn- tactically connected to an Agr-position. The variable interpretation of Agr in this context is derived in the same way as for English. Notice that if Agr receives a (ref- erential) pronominal reading instead, then the wh-operator will have no variable to bind, and the result will be ruled out in terms of LF-interpretability (vacuous quan- tification). Where the examples in (32) differ from their English counterpart though is with respect to the valuation of the phi-features, which is done by means of inflec- tion. while in English it is directly derived by the wh-phrase.ﬂ In (32) the result con- verges as long as the phi-features of the embedded Agr match those of the wh- phrase.15 Notice that if the above analysis is correct, then it crucially differs from Rizzi™s (1982), which argues for subject extraction from a postverbal position. At the same time it maintains the correlation between null subjects and the lack of ‚that-t™ effects. Before I move on it is worth reviewing Rizzi™s (1982) empirical evidence regarding subject extraction from a postverbal position. The first piece of evidence comes from ne-cliticization facts, while the second relates to the wide scope interpretation of negative elements when these occur in a postverbal position. A further piece of evi- dence comes from Northern Italian dialects, but I will discuss this in the context of subject-clitic languages below. Let us start by considering the first set of data. The ﬂ Perhaps this difference between the two groups of languages implies a further distinction in the interpretation of Agr in the case of extraction. To be more precise, if in (32) agreement still values the phi-features of Agr, which is in turn associated with the wh-phrase. one could argue that Agr in this con- text is akin to a resumptive pronoun. Valuation of the phi-features by the wh-phrase in English. on the other hand, makes Agr behave more like a variable. We will not consider the implications of this possi- ble outcome in the present paper. I5 Notice that in Greek at least if the phi-features of the wh-phrase match those of both the embedded and the matrix predicate the result is ambiguous, as shown in (i) below: (i) Pjos nomizi oti apetixe stis eksetasis‚? who think-3 that failed-3s to-the exams a. ‚Who, does he! think failed the exams™?™ b. ‚Who, thinks that he, failed the exams™?™ In the first interpretation, the matrix Agr is interpreted as a pronominal. and the embedded one as a vari- able. In the second interpretation, the two readings are reversed. In a discourse neutral context, the pre- ferred reading is that in (b). 42 A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 clitic ne found with quantified objects is also possible with subjects of unaccusatives since these have properties typical of objects (Rizzi, 1982: 150-151): (33) a. b. C. d. Sono cadute alcune pietre. are fell-down some stones Ne sono cadute alcune. of-them are fell-down some ‚Some stones fell down.™ Quan te pietre hai detto the sono cadute? How-many stones have said that are fell-down ‚How many stones did you say fell down?™ Quante hai detto the *(ne) sono cadute? how-many have said that of them are fell-down ‚How many (of them) did you say fell down?™ The contrast between (33a,c) and (33b&,d) is taken to show that the subject is extracted from a postverbal position, otherwise ne in (33d) wouldn™t be obligatory. In (33a) Agr is associated with the DP alcune pietre via Agree. The reference of Agr is then fixed in association with that of the DP (in this case we have a non-referen- tial reading, as the DP-subject is a quantificational expression). In (33~) the same result is achieved with the wh-phrase in the Spec,CP. Thus (33a) and (33~) are straightforward. Consider next (33b) and (33d). Notice that when ne is present the NP-restrictor associated with the quantifier alcune is not present. Thus ne can be the lexicalization of features associated with the NP part of the DP. This is consistent with Rizzi™s (1982) account which takes ne to correspond to the N™-part of the NP; translating this to the DP-hypothesis we take ne to lexicalize the NP. However, given that ne can also be found with objects of transitive verbs, it is not so clear that it spells out the features of subject Agr. Instead, one could claim that it spells out fea- tures associated with objects, and in particular partitive case (cf. Manzini and Savoia, 1998b). The presence of ne in (33d) is now expected: what occurs in the matrix spec,CP is the wh-phrase without the NP-restrictor, which is lexicalized by the clitic ne. Hence the obligatory presence of ne. The representations that corre- spond to (33~) and (33d) are given in (34a) and (34b) respectively: (34) a. Ouante pietre . ..[ the [&...[V (8)]]] b. Ouante . . ._. [ the Agr [ ne [V (Q)]]] Although a more detailed discussion of ne-cliticization is necessary, we can at least see that an alternative account is possible. If this alternative approach is on the right track, the ne-facts do not provide strong evidence for extraction from a postverbal position in null-subject languages, as what ne lexicalizes is (NP) features associated with thematic objects.‚ﬂ I6 Further evidence for the need to invoke distinct features comes from the fact that constructions with ne allow for reconstruction and are sensitive to islands, while those without ne show the opposite pattern (cf. Manzini, 1998). A. Rou.~~ou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 43 The second piece of evidence provided by Rizzi (1982: 126) has to do with the interpretation of negative elements such as nesstrno: (35) a. Non pretend0 the nessunu sia arrestato. not require-1s that nobody be arrested. ‚I do not require that nobody be arrested.™ b. Non pretend0 the sia arrestato yIessunu. ‚I do not require that anybody be arrested.™ Preverbal nessuno in (35a) takes narrow scope, while postverbal nessU?ro in (35b) takes wide scope, i.e. it is associated with matrix negation. Rizzi argues that the wide scope reading is possible because lresslo?u can raise from the postverbal subject posi- tion, which is properly governed, and become associated with non. However, this option is excluded when nessuno is in preverbal position, as its trace will not be properly governed at LF (an ECP-effect). Kayne (1984) points out similar data in French. In standard terms, the main difference between (35b) and wh-extraction in (32) is captured in terms of covert vs. overt movement respectively. However, if the overt vs. covert distinction does not apply in a strictly derivational (or strictly repre- sentational for that matter) model, then we need an alternative account for the data in (35) in any case (see also Kayne, 1998, who makes this point, but offers no analy- sis). Given that this is a rather large topic, and perhaps the data are not so clear-cut, I will only make some tentative suggestions. First, if there is no covert movement, then the wide scope reading in (35b) will have to be derived through Agree, and in particular through the syntactic connection of ~z~ssz4~~o with the matrix negation MV?. Similarly. the narrow scope reading of nes- SUIKI in (35a) must result from the absence of such a relation, i.e. non and nessuno cannot be related via Agree. Second, lzessulro in matrix clauses is also incompatible with no~r, while in its postverbal position it requires the presence of MM, as shown in (36a) and (36b) respectively (this holds for subjects and objects alike): (36) a. Nesslrrzo (*non) ha telefonato. Nobody (not) has telephoned b. *(Non) ha telefonato IresscIIro. (not) has telephoned nobody. ‚Nobody called.™ Let us assume then that preverbal lressz4lro is in Spec,NegP. The realization of Neg by a phrasal element excludes the simultaneous realization by the head WIT as well (cf. Koopman, 1996, for a discussion of configurations of this type). On the other hand, postverbal nessuno has the typical properties of a negative polarity item, requiring licensing by an overt negative marker, in this case the head of NegP non (cf. Zanuttini, 1997). If this is correct, it provides us with a possible explanation for the different readings of neswm in (36). The same holds for (35): in (35a) tressz4tru realizes NegP in the embedded clause, hence its narrow scope in the presence of matrix negation. To be more precise, nessuno is not licensed by matrix negation. In 44 A. Roussou I Lingua I12 (2002) 13-52 (35b) ~~SSZUZO must be associated with a negative element as it does not realize NegP. Given that negation occurs in the matrix clause, neSSun0 acquires a wide scope interpretation. Obviously, a more detailed discussion of n-words is required (cf. Giannakidou, 1998; Horn and Kato, 2000, for more recent accounts and refer- ences). For present purposes, it suffices to say that there is an alternative explanation of the data in (35) that does not require LF-movement from a postverbal position, but relates the different readings to the properties of n-words and the operation Agree. Further investigation of this issue is left open to future research. The discussion so far has shown that the absence of ‚that-t™ effects in null-subject languages follows from their independent property of having Agr lexicalized through an agreement affix. In this respect the present analysis maintains the traditional observation regarding the correlation of null subjects and absence of ‚that-t effects, while succeeding in deriving the relevant effects directly from the parametric prop- erties of Agr.ﬂ Let us next turn to a slightly different set of languages, i.e. those that also realize Agr inflectionally, albeit in the form of a subject clitic. The most typical case is that of the various Northern Italian dialects (cf. Rizzi, 1986b; Brandi and Cordin, 1989; Manzini and Savoia, in press;, Poletto, 2000). Consider the following Fiorentino examples (from Brandi and Cordin, 1989: 125) : (37) a. Gli ha telefonato delle ragazze cl. have-3s telephoned some girls ‚Some girls telephoned.™ b. Quante ragazze tu credi the gli abbia parlato? how many girls you think-2s that cl. have-3s spoken ‚How many girls do you think spoke?™ c. [cp Qua&e ragazze tu credi[,, the [At-‚r_T gli-abbia] parlato]] In (37a) the clitic gli realizes Agr and the subject occurs in a postverbal position. In (37b) the subject is realized as a wh-phrase in the matrix Spec,CP, and according to ﬂ Gereon Miiller (personal communication) has pointed out to me that Russian and Polish are prob- lematic as they are both null-subject languages, like Standard Italian and Greek, but do show &t-t effects like English (cf. Miiller, 1995 : 124, 30 1). While the null-subject property of Russian may be con- troversial (Pesetsky, 1981-1982) this is not so for Polish. Consider the following Polish examples (thanks to Ewa Jaworska, personal communication): (i) a. *Kto myslisz, ze wyjechal? Who think-2s that left-3s b. Jak myslisz, kto wyjechal? How think-2s who left-3s ‚Who do you think left?™ (ia) looks like a standard ‚that-t™ effect. However, a closer look shows that the ungrammaticality is due to the fact that the wh-subject is realized in the matrix spec,CP. This is ruled out as Polish has partial wh-movement. In fact when the subject is realized in the embedded Spec,CP the result is grammatical as (ib) illustrates. As Miiller (1995: 36, fn. 17) points out the problematic data involve a subjunctive C. In this case while the object is allowed to long move, the subject is not. This is probably due to the corre- lation between a subjunctive C and the embedded subject. A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (20021 13-52 45 what I have said so far, it enters an Agree relation with the clitic gli (Agr) in the embedded clause, as illustrated in (37~). There is nothing problematic so far regard- ing the association of the wh-phrase with the clitic, on the assumption that the latter is connected with the wh-operator in the same way that Agr is in Standard Italian. Two points are worth mentioning with respect to the above data. First, as (37a) shows, the subject occurs in a postverbal position, thus yielding an expletive (gli) - associate (delle rugazze) pair. Second, the auxiliary agrees (in number) with the clitic and not with the postverbal subject. To be more precise, the auxiliary is inflected for 3rd person singular, while the subject delle r-agaze is in the plural. We thus see that the number inflection on the verb is determined by the clitic. Let us call this ‚anti-agreement™ with respect to number. When the subject is a wh-phrase and occurs in the matrix Spec,CP, as shown in (37b), we also get verbal agreement with the expletive clitic and not with the subject. Interestingly, the clitic le, which is typ- ically associated with preverbal subjects in this dialect and furthermore triggers agreement, is blocked when subject extraction has taken place, as shown in (38) below: (38) *Quante ragazze tu credi the le abbiano parlato? how many girls you think-2s that cl. have-3p spoken ‚How many girls do you think have spoken?™ The contrast between (37b) and (38) has been taken as further evidence for extrac- tion from a postverbal position in null-subject and subject-clitic languages (Rizzi, 1990). If this turns out to be the case, then the idea of direct merger of the wh-phrase in Spec,CP is challenged as the subject will have to occur in a postverbal position at some point in the derivation, so that the desired ‚anti-agreement™ effect can be cap- tured. Notice though that this approach focuses on the relation between the verb (more precisely the inflection on the verb) and the subject, leaving the properties of the clitic aside. If, on the other hand, we focus on the properties of the clitic, the explanation may be different, and the above data may turn out not to be counterex- amples to the present approach. We turn to this point immediately below. In order to provide an account for the contrast in (37)-(38) I will mainly follow the analysis of Manzini and Savoia (in press) regarding the lack of agreement between the subject clitic/auxiliary and the postverbal subject (the ‚anti-agreement™ effect) illustrated in (37a) above. The first point they make is that ‚anti-agreement™ is restricted to number (singular vs. plural) and not to person, that is if the postver- bal subject is a 1 st or 2nd person pronoun there is always agreement: the clitic, the verb, and the postverbal subject all agree. Notice that if this effect is restricted to 3rd person, its presence with wh-phrases is expected, as (subject) wh-questions are by definition restricted to 3rd person. The second relevant point is that the ‚anti-agree- ment™ effect is not a generalized property of the Northern Italian dialects (cf. the Friuli dialects for example, which do not show this effect). Manzini and Savoia (in press) provide an articulated structure for the nominal features typically realized by clitics (or agreement affixes as well). In the present paper, we have simply collapsed all of them under a single head Agr. Manzini and Savoia (op. cit.) argue for the 46 A. Roussou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 individuation of four features hierarchically structured as follows: D (reference) - Num (plural) - P (Ist, 2nd person) - N (singular). As they put it ﬁ... standard semantic theories identify N with predicative content of the DP; since N is nothing but a predicate, the referential properties of the DP reside in D. In effect, D is a quantifier and N represents its restrictionﬂ (Manzini and Savoia, in press: 182-183). Different clitics may lexicalize different features in the above hierarchy. In terms of the structure proposed by Manzini and Savoia, the presence vs. absence of agree- ment effects is viewed as a function of the properties of the subject (3rd singular/plural) and of the lexical specification of the clitic. Crucially, third person pronominal clitics can either behave like typical pronouns (i.e. lst/2nd person pro- nouns), or like lexical DPs . In the former case, they are basically assimilated to D, and thus carry a referential import, triggering agreement in all features (‚referential™ agreement in their terms). In the latter case, these clitics lack referential properties and can trigger agreemnt with respect to the N-feature only (what Manzini and Savoia call ‚predicative™). Generally speaking, given that the N-feature stands for singular, it is expected that in this case we will have agreement between the clitic and the verb with respect to this feature only. Thus if the subject is in the plural, it will fail to agree with the verb (and the clitic), hence the ‚anti-agreement™ effect mentioned above. Leaving the details of their analysis aside, what we need to bear in mind is that in the case of ‚referential™ agreement, the clitic pronoun is more or less assimilated to D, and does not lexicalize the N-feature. In ‚predicative™ agreement, on the other hand, the clitic lexicalizes the N-feature. On this basis, let us now go back to the Fiorentino examples above. The clitic le triggers ‚referential™ agreement, while gli triggers ‚predicative™ agreement, In others words, le behaves like a 1st or 2nd pronoun, while the expletive gli doesn™t. In subject extraction, only gli can be pre- sent but not le, that is the clitic that corresponds to D and carries referential prop- erties is blocked, while the one that corresponds to the DP is possible. This is to be expected, if the subject features associated with the gap cannot be interpreted ref- erentially due to their association with the wh-feature in Spec,CP via Agree. In other words, the referential properties of le are incompatible with the required variable interpretation. We then see that the Fiorentino data in (37)-(38) represent a refined system as far as the lexicalization of the various nominal features by cli- tics is concerned. The dialects that do not distinguish between two 3rd person cli- tics of this kind, i.e. have an undifferentiated clitic, do not exhibit this contrast. In principle, one would expect to find similar results in relation to agreement affixes, i.e. different agreement with postverbal and wh-subjects, even in the absence of subject clitics; we will not discuss these cases here though. Assuming this analysis to be on the right track, we are able to accommodate the problematic data in (37) and (38) without resorting on subject extraction from a postverbal position; this allows us to retain our original proposal which takes the wh-phrase to be directly merged in Spec,CP. The Fiorentino extraction data are instead derived from the lex- ical specification of the clitics in question (see also Campos, 1997, for a similar claim, although he maintains the standard analysis of extraction from a postverbal position). A. Rortssou I Linpu 112 (2002) 13-52 47 Before we conclude our discussion it is worth commenting on some other strat- egies of subject extraction in association with C, such as the quelqui alternation in French (cf. the quelqui rule of Pesetsky, 198 l-1982), as illustrated below: (39) Qui penses-tu quil*que est venu? Who think-you that is come ‚Who do you think came?™ For Rizzi ( 1990) qui is que + Agr, triggered by the intermediate trace in Spec,CP. In current terms we could simply take qlri to be the realization of the feature content of T along with Agr in C, more or less as in Rizzi™s analysis but without postulating head government. However unlike C,, in English, qui is restricted to subject extrac- tion, and is not found independently. There have been some very recent approaches which challenge the above analysis of qzri. In particular, Taraldsen (in press) and Manzini and Savoia (1998a), based on the che/c,hi alternation in some Rheto-Romance dialects, argue that yzli in French is actually the complementizer yore followed by a subject clitic. This is illustrated with the following data from Vallader (Taraldsen, in press: 23): (40) a. Qua1 cudesch crajast chm/*chi !as mattas cumpraran? which book think-2s that the girls will-buy ‚Which book do you think that the girls will buy™?™ b. Qualas mattas crajast chi Pchn cumpraran quel cudesch? which girls think-2s that will-buy that book ‚Which girls do you think will buy that book? ™ C. . . . la spranza chil*rJla turnaran quels temps docts. the hope that will-return those times learned * . . . the hope that those learned times will return.™ d. 1 turnaran quels temps docts. it will-return those times learned ‚Those learned times will return.™ As (40~) shows c,hi is found in non-extraction contexts as well. This is accounted for if c,lri is c,ha plus the clitic i, also found in (40d), as argued by Taraldsen (in press). The subject clitic is excluded in (40~) because the subject is realized as a DP, hence the presence of c,ha. On the basis of these data, Taraldsen further argues that qui in French is also qz4e + i. According to his analysis, the clitic i has descended from the Latin pronoun id, following the loss of gender and number features. The alternative is to assume, along with Rooryck (ZOOO), that que is actually clue plus the subject clitic il. which is found independently in French (see Rooryck, op. cit.; for full argu- mentation; a rather similar claim is made by Manzini and Savoia, 1998a, although their arguments come from the Italian dialects, and not from French). Despite the differences, what is important to note is that both analyses treat qui as a complex form, consisting of the complementizer and a subject pronominal element. 1 will therefore adopt this line of arguments regarding L/U;. If this is correct, then we have 48 A. Ro~tssou I Lingua 112 (2002) 13-52 an account of the quelqui alternation without requiring head government, or the pres- ence of a subject trace in C for that matter. The availability of a subject clitic in subject position when extraction takes place is found in other languages as well. Another case at hand is that of Lebanese Arabic (Aoun, 1981) where the complementizer ?anna is followed by the clitic hu which essentially realizes the Agr-features of the subject, when the subject is a wh-phrase. There is one more option available and this is to find a full pronoun filling the sub- ject gap, as in the case of full resumptive pronouns. This strategy is presumably a last resort one and is found in those languages that have none of the above options available. To this end, Rizzi (1990: 61) cites Engdahl(l985) on the use of a resump- tive pronoun in Swedish. Maling and Zaenen (1978) point towards similar examples in those Dutch dialects which show a ‚that-t™ effect unless the subject pronoun er is present (cf. also Koster, 1986, on subject extraction in Dutch and its correlation with ‚pro-drop™). Finally, a similar effect is found in those French dialects which do not have the quelqui rule, and merger of a full pronoun is the only way for forming a wh-question with the embedded subject (Philippe Schlenker, personal communica- tion; see also Labelle, 1990). To summarize, different languages use different strategies for extracting the sub- ject. According to the discussion in this section, the parametric variation found in association with subject extraction is a by-product of the lexicalization properties of Agr. In particular, languages like English and Danish which require a full DP to spell out Agr, resort to the C-strategy, i.e. make use of a special C that allows for the lex- icalization of Agr as well. Typical null-subject languages do not show sensitivity to the form of C, on the basis that Agr is in any case lexicalized via the agreement affix. The same holds for subject-clitic languages, in which case the clitic (doubling the agreement affix or not) realizes Agr. Merger of a full pronoun in Agr is also attested in those languages that have none of the above devices. I also showed that the way C is lexicalized plays a role in subject extraction. To this end, the availabil- ity of a split C-system is quite enlightening. This point was illustrated with the case of English dialects that do not show a that-t effect, although they seem to be like English in all other respects, i.e. requiring a DP to spell out Agr. This was attributed to the fact that that only lexicalizes the higher C (Force), allowing for the realization of the feature content of T, along with Agr, in the lower (C). Data of this type fur- ther support the correlation between C and Agr. 6. Concluding remarks In the present paper I have provided an alternative account of standard ECP- effects, formulated within a derivational model. In particular, it was argued that the licensing and identification conditions of the conjunctive ECP (Rizzi, 1990) can be understood as conditions that relate to the PF- and LF-interfaces respectively. The notion of a phase plays a crucial role, assuming that LF and PF are built in parallel. Subject extraction with that present in English gives rise to ungrammaticality as that cannot lexicalize Agr; Co, on the other hand, can and the derivation converges (the licensing part of the ECP). The value of Agr in this case is determined in association with the wh-phrase in the matrix Spec,CP as the result of the operation Agree (the identification part). It was also argued that the C-Agr relation via T is found in other contexts as well, such as the availability of null subjects under V2, or even in con- trol contexts. The C-T relation is subject to a number of different realizations and is established on the basis of features such as finiteness, Q, etc. The cross-linguistic variation attested with respect to subject extraction is to a large extent dependent on the different ways Agr is lexicalized. Furthermore it was shown that the lexicaliza- tion of C is relevant, given that a lexical complementizer may occur in a higher or lower C-head, thus not always affecting subject extraction. The proposed analysis has followed a strictly derivational model, showing how typical representational effects (ECP) can indeed be captured derivationally. The crucial assumption has been that PF and LF are built in parallel. In this model there is no overt/covert distinction, as well as no separate operation Move. One could then argue that the present analysis can be taken as evidence for the superiority of a derivational model over a representational one. On the other hand, it could be claimed that the same analysis can be rephrased in purely representational terms in a model that allows for spell-out from LF (cf. Brody, 199.5, 1997). I will not attempt to show how this can be achieved at this point. However, if this turns out to be cor- rect, then the present analysis does not offer empirical support for a derivational model. It still succeeds though in capturing the empirical advantages of the ECP, a standard representational principle, in derivational terms. At the same time it cap- tures the essence of the ECP (standardly expressed in terms of licensing and identi- fication conditions) on a minimalist basis, while eliminating its conceptual disad- vantages. References Adams, M.. 1987. Old French, null subjects and verb second phenomena. Doctoral dissertation. Univer- sity of California. Los Angeles. Alexiadou, A. and E. Anagnostopoulou, 1998. Parametrizing Agr: Word order. V-movement and EPP- checking. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 16. 49 l-539. Aoun, J., I98 I. ECP. Move, and Subjacency. Linguistic Inquiry 12, 637-645. Besten. H. den. 1983. On the interaction of root transformations and lexical deletive rules. In: W. Abra- ham (ed.). On the formal syntax of Westgermania, 47-138. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. Bianchi, V., 1999. Consequences of antisymmetry: Headed relative clauses. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Borer. H., 1986. I-subjects. Linguistic Inquiry 17. 375-416. Borer. H.. 1989. Anaphoric AGR. In: 0. Jaeggli and K.J. Safir (eds.). The null subject parameter, 69-109. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Brandi, L. and P. Cordin. 1989. Two Italian dialects and the null subject parameter. In: 0. Jaeggli and K.J. Safir (eds.), The null subject parameter, I I-142. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Bran&m, P.. 1996. Tracing f/l&t variation. In: J.R. Black and V. Motapanyane (eds.). Microparametric syntax and dialect variation, 25-39 (Current Issues in Linguistic Theory 139). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. Bresnan. J.. 1077. Variables in the theory of transformations. In: P. Culicover, T. Wasow and A. Akma- jian (eds.), Formal syntax. 157-196. New York: Academic Press. Brody, M.. 1995. Lexico-logical form: A radically minimalist theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. SO A. Roussou I Lingua I12 (2002) 13-S2 Brody, M., 1997. Perfect chains. In: L. Haegeman (ed.), Elements of grammar: Handbook of generative syntax, 139-167. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Browning, M.A., 1996. CP recursion and thut-t effects. Linguistic Inquiry 27, 237-255. Campos, H., 1997. On subject extraction and the anti-agreement effect in Romance. Linguistic Inquiry 28,92-i 19. Chomsky, N., 1981. Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris. Chomsky, N., 1982. Some concepts and consequences of the theory of government and binding. Cam- bridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1986a. Knowledge of language: Its nature, origin, and use. New York: Praeger. Chomsky, N., 1986b. Barriers. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N.. 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1998. Minimalist inquiries: The framework. MIT Occasional Papers in Linguistics. [Also in: R. Martin, D. Michaels and J. Uriagereka (eds.), 2000. Step by step: Essays on minimalism in honor of Howard Lasnik, 89-156. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.] Chomsky, N., 1999. Derivation by phase. Manuscript, MIT. Chomsky. N. and H. Lasnik, 1977. Filters and control. Linguistic Inquiry 8, 425-504. Cormack, A. and N.V. Smith, 2000. Head movement and negation in English. Transactions of the Philo- logical Society 98, 49-85. Culicover, P., 1993. Evidence against ECP accounts of the that-t effect. Linguistic Inquiry 24, 557-561. Davis. H., 2000. Identifying agreement. Paper presented at the GLOW 23 Workshop on Null/Overt mor- phology, Bilbao. Enc, M.. 1987. Anchoring conditions for tense. Linguistic Inquiry 18, 633-657. Engdahl, E., 1985. Parasitic gaps, resumptive pronouns, and subject extractions. Linguistics 23, 3- 44. Giannakidou, A., 1998. Polartty sensitivity as (non-)veridical dependency. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. Haegeman, L., 2000. Negative preposing, negative inversion, and the split CP. In: L.R. Horn and Y. Kato (eds.), Negation and polarity: Syntactic and semantic perspectives, 21-61. Oxford: Oxford Uni- versity Press. Hale, K. and S.J. Keyser, 1993. On argument structure and the lexical expression of syntactic relations. In: K. Hale and S.J. Keyser (eds.), The view from building 20, 53-109. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Henry, A., 1995. Belfast English and Standard English: Dialect variation and parameter setting. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Holmberg, A. and C. Platzack, 1995. The role of inflection in Scandinavian syntax. Oxford: Oxford Uni- versity Press. Horn, L.R. and Y. Kato. 2000. Introduction: Negation and polarity at the millenium. In: L.R. Horn and Y. Kato (eds.). Negation and polarity: Syntactic and semantic perspectives. I-19. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Homstein. N., 1999. Movement and control. Linguistic Inquiry 30, 69-96. Huang. C.T.J.. 1989. Pro-drop in Chinese: A generalized control theory. In: 0. Jaeggli and K.J. Safir (eds.), The null subject parameter, 1855214. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Kayne, R., 1984. Connectedness and binary branching. Dordrecht: Foris. Kayne. R., 1994. The antisymmetry of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Kayne, R., 1998. Overt vs. covert movement. Syntax I, 128-191. [Reprinted in: R. Kayne, 2000. Par- ameters and universals. 233-28 I. Oxford: Oxford University Press.] Koopman. H., 1983. ECP effects in main clauses. Linguistic Inquiry 14, 346350. Koopman, H., 1996. The spec-head configuration. In: E. Garrett and F. Lee (eds.), Syntax at sunset, 37-64. UCLA Working Papers in Linguistics. Koster, J., 19X6. The relation between pro-drop, scrambling, and verb movements. Manuscript, Univer- sity of Groningen. Labelle, M.. 1990. Licensing of empty categories in child language. Manuscript, UQAM. Landau, I., 2000. Partial control and Agr-to-C. Paper presented at GLOW 23. Vitoria. Maling, J. and A. Zaenen, 1978. The non-universality of surface filters. Linguistic Inquiry, 9: 475-497. Manzini, M.R., 1998. A minimalist theory of weak islands. In: P. Culicover and L. McNally (eds.), The limits of syntax. 185-209. New York: Academic Publishers. Manzini, M.R. and A. Roussou. 2000. A minimalist theory of A-movement and control. Lingua I IO, 409-447. Manzini. M.R. and L. Savoia, IYYXa. Varier& romanze a verbo secondo. In: Studi in memoria di Giorgio Chiarini, 459492. Firenze: Alinea. Manzini. M.R. and L. Savoia. I998b. Clitics and auxiliary choice in Italian dialects: Their relevance t™or the person erpativity split. Recherches Linquistiques i Vincennes 27. 115-13X. Manzini, M.R. and L. Savoia. in press. Parameters of subJect inflection in Italian dialects. In: P. Sveno- nius (ed.). Sub,jccts. expletives and the EPP. IS-201 Oxford: Oxford University Press. McCloskey, J.. 1990. Resumptive pronouns. A-bar bindin p and levels of representation in Irish. In: R. Hendrick (ed.), The syntax and semantics of the Celtic languages. 199-248 (Syntax and Semantics 23). New York: Academic Press. McCloskey. J., 1992. Adjunction, selection and embedded verb second. Linguistics Research Report LRC-Y2-07. University of California. Santa Cruz. McDaniel, D.. 1989. Partial and multiple wh-movement. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 7. 565-604. Miiller. G.. 199.5. A-bar syntax: A study in movement types. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Noonnn, M., 19Y7. Functional architecture and wh-movement: Irish as a case in point. In: E. Guilfoyle (ed.). The syntax of the Celtic languages. Special Issue of the Canadian Journal of Linguistics 42( I/?): I I l-141. Perlmutter, D.. 1971. Deep and surface constraints in syntax. New York: Holt. Pesetsky. D., 19X I-1982. Complementizer trace phenomena and the nominative island condition. The Linguistic Review I. 297-343. Pesetsky. D. and E. Torrego. 2001. T-tn-C movement: Causes and consequences. In: M. Kenhtowicz (ed.). Ken Hale: A life in language in press. Cambridge. MA: MIT Press. Platzack. C.. in press. Multiple interfaces. In: U. Nikanne and E. van der Zce (eds.), Conceptual struc- ture and its interfaces with other modules of representation. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Poletto. C., 2000. The higher functional field: Evidence from Northern Italian dialects. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Reinhart. T. and E. Reuland. 1903. Retlexlvity. Linguistic Inquiry 23. 657-720. Rirzi. L., 19X2. Issues in Italian syntax. Dordrecht: Foria. Rixli. L., I986a. Null ob.jects in Italian and the theory of ,>I™ﬁ. Linguistic Inquiry 17, 501-558. Rizli. L.. IY86b. On the status of subject clitics in Romance. In: 0. Jaegpli and C. Silva-Corvalin (eds.), Studics in Romance linguistics. 391419. Dordrecht: Foris. RiTzi, L.. IYYO. Relativized minimality. Cambridpe. MA: MIT Press. Rirzi. L.. I YY I Residual verb second and the wh-criterion. Technical Reports in Formal and Computa- tional Linguistics 2, University of Geneva. [Reprinted in: A. Belletti and L. Rizzi (eds.), 1096. Par- ameters and functional head<, 61-YO. Oxford: Oxford University Press.] Rizzl. L.. 1997. The fine structure of the left periphery. In: L. Hacgeman (ed.). Elements of grammar: Handbook ot™ generative syntax. 2X l-337. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Roberts. 1.. lOY3. Verbs and diachronic syntax: A comparative history of English and French. Dor- drecht: Kluwer. Roberth. 1.. 2000. Principles and parameter< in a VSO language: A case study in Welsh syntax. Manu- actipt, bniversity of Stuttgart. Roberts, I. and A. Roussou, 1999. Intert™ace interpretation. Manuscript. University of Stuttgart and Uni- versity of Cyprus. Roberts. 1. and A. Roussou. in press. The EPP as a condition on the tense-dependency. In: P. Svenonius (rd.). Subjects, expletives and the EPP. 125-156. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Rohrhacher, B.. 1999. Morpholog),.driven syntax: A theory of V to I raising and pro-drop. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. Rooryck. J.. 2000. Configurations of sentential complementation: perspectives from Romance lan- guages. London: Routledge. Roussou. A., 1994. The syntax of complementizers. Doctoral dissertation, University College London. Roussou. A., l9Y6. Specifiers. head-dependencies. and asymmetric relations. GLOW Newsletter 36. S&.57. Roussou, A., 2000. On the left periphery: Modal particles and complementizers. Journal of Greek Lin- guistics I, 63-92. Savoia, L. and M.R. Manzini, in preparation. I dialetti Italiani. Bologna: II Mulino. Sobin, N.. 1987. The variable status of Comp-trace phenomena. Natural Language and Linguistic The- ory 5, 33-60. Stoweil, T.. 1982. The tense of infinitives. Linguistic Inquiry 13, 561-570. Tardldsen, K.T., 1979. On the NIC, vacuous application and the fhat-trace filter. Manuscript, MIT. Taraldsen, K.T., in press. The yzcciqrti-alternation and the distribution of expletives. In: P. Svenonius (ed.), Subjects, expletives and the EPP, 21-35. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Tsimpli. I.M., 1997. Resumptive strategies and L2A: A minimalist account. In: E. Hughes, M. Hughes and A. Greenhill (eds.), Boston University Conference on Language Development 21. vol. 2. 639-655. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla. Vanelli, L., L. Renzi and P. Beninca, 19X5. Typologie des pronoms sujets dans les langues romanes. In: Linguistique descriptive: Actes du XVIIe Congrts International de Linguistiques et Philologie Romanes, vol. 3. 164-176. Aix-en-Provence: University of Provence. Vikner, S., 1995. Verb movement and expletive subjects in the Germanic languages. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Vikner, S., 1997. V-to-Iﬂ movement and inflection for person in all tenses. In: L. Haegeman (ed.). The new comparative syntax, 189-2 13. London: Longman. Zanuttini, R., 1997. Negation and clausal structure: A comparative study of Romance languages. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 