ELSEVIER Lingua 112 (2002) 7-1 I www.elsevier.com/locateflingua Lingua Franca On text and corpus analysis: A reply to Borsley and Inghamﬂ Michael S tubbs* FB2 Anglisfik, University of Trier, D-54286 Trier, Germany Received 9 January 2000; revised version 12 February 2000 Borsley and Ingham (2001, henceforth BI) criticize applied linguistics and corpus linguistics, and contrast these two areas with what they repeatedly call ‚mainstream™ linguistics. In the context of their argument, the term ‚mainstream™ is purely evalua- tive. What is central and what is marginal cannot be presupposed, since such an opposition obscures the point that no-one has the whole truth about language. Throughout their article, BI wrongly identify applied linguistics with text and cor- pus analysis. Some linguists do both; and some linguists apply corpus methods to real world problems, such as authorship attribution (e.g. in forensic linguistics) and the preparation of language teaching materials (e.g. dictionaries for advanced leam- ers). However, many applied linguists make no use of text and corpus analysis. Con- versely, many corpus linguists have purely theoretical aims of describing and under- standing how language is organized and used. Much corpus work is not applied at all, and there is certainly no logical and necessary connection between the two areas. BI wonder whether the lack of contact between theoretical and applied linguistics is due to a belief that ﬁapplied linguistics can and should develop its own theories of languageﬂ. Applied linguists have indeed debated intensively whether linguistics can be applied directly to real world problems, or whether applied linguistics must me- diate findings from various disciplines, including linguistics. BI make no reference to this debate, which began in the 1970s and still continues today. (One influential article was Widdowson (1980), publishe™d in the first volume of the journal Applied Linguistics.) I cannot here summarize arguments from the last 25 years, but one essential point is very simple. In real world problems in which language is a major I-™ I am grateful to several colleagues for comments on a draft of this response * E-mail: stubbs@uni-trier.de 037%2166/02/$ - see front matter 0 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(01)00035-3 8 M. Stubbs I Lingua 112 (2002) 7-11 factor, there are always other non-linguistic factors, such as psychological and social (in language teaching), and political and financial (in language planning). Ideas from theoretical linguistics cannot therefore, on their own, solve real world language problems. BI propose I-language as the only coherent object of study, and cannot see the purpose of studying language in use. Some of their argument here is pure parody. I do not know of any work in corpus linguistics (or anywhere else) which tries to make a coherent object of study out of properties of texts such as BI propose: ﬁbeing interesting, being libellous, or being available from all good bookshopsﬂ. Text lin- guistics studies exactly what BI state quite clearly elsewhere: ﬁthe linguistic proper- ties of textsﬂ, including their vocabulary, the percentage of passives, discourse con- nectives, and so on. Their list is however very short: in an important early demonstration of what is possible with computational assistance, Biber (1988) com- pares the frequency of 67 grammatical features across many different genres of writ- ten and spoken English. Such linguistic properties of texts have been studied inten- sively in much other work on stylistics, register variation and text types. BI cannot find any coherence in the study of how written and spoken texts vary along dimensions of content and style. They find it ﬁvery oddﬂ that ﬁsuch diverse thingsﬂ could constitute an object of systematic study, but they do not assess any of the many empirical studies on such topics. They do not mention any stylistic work (e.g. by Roman Jakobson, M.A.K. Halliday or Geoffrey Leech). Nor do they men- tion any work (by William Labov or others) which demonstrates empirical methods for studying systematic relations between linguistic and non-linguistic variables (such as social class, gender, age and formality of situation). Language variation is only rarely random, how and why it varies is increasingly well understood, and work on such variation has obviously contributed to linguistic theory. In the past, it was seen as well-nigh impossible to study language in use, and, although parole/performance is a central aspect of human behaviour, this was often set aside as inaccessible to systematic study. The question nowadays is whether tech- nological advances can help with what were previously intractable problems. We come therefore to one area which BI criticize: computer-assisted corpus lin- guistics. Here, BI simply ignore the foundational work in the field. They do not refer to any of the primary descriptive work on corpora since the 1960s by (in rough chronological order) scholars such as W. Nelson Francis, Henry Kucera, Randolph Quirk, Geoffrey Leech, Jan Svartvik, John Sinclair, and Douglas Biber. Such work is comprehensively reviewed in an excellent introduction by Kennedy (1998), and some of the most important methods and concepts are illustrated with detailed gram- matical examples by Hunston and Francis (1999), two scholars who have played a leading role in producing corpus-based dictionaries and grammars. BI then make two very misleading statements about corpus work: that it can deal only with lexis, and that it cannot tackle problems of meaning. BI say that ﬁa corpus is only as useful as one™s ability to search itﬂ: absolutely true, but they do not discuss this topic from either end. They do not assess the avail- able search software, nor do they discuss how corpora can be grammatically tagged or parsed to facilitate grammatical study. Nor indeed do they discuss the relation M. Sruhhs I Lingua 112 (2002) 7-11 9 between the grammatical categories developed in abstract syntax and the categories required to tag corpora. They assume that any knowledge of linguistic properties must come from a study of I-language, and do not consider the alternative, that a study of language in use might contribute to the understanding of grammar. (e.g. Sinclair, 1991: 81ff.; Sampson, 1995.) They continue: ﬁThere is no problem if one is just interested in lexical statisticsﬂ. Much work does deal with this topic: an excellent article is by Kilgarriff (1997). But it is misleading to imply that corpus studies are restricted to lexis. Not only are major grammars based on data from large corpora, of 100 million words and upwards (Sin- clair et al., 1990, Francis et al., 1996; 1998; Biber et al., 1999). In addition, the most important theoretical findings include the demonstration that the boundaries between lexis and syntax need to be radically redrawn (see again Hunston and Francis, 1999, for many examples). None of this work is mentioned by BI. BI also state: ﬁA final problem concerns meaningﬂ, and claim that ﬁthe only way to find out about meanings is to ask native speakers.ﬂ This is simply not true, and seems to be based on several misunderstandings. No-one claims that semantic analy- sis can be done mechanically. Intuition and intelligent guesses are required in designing corpora, deciding what patterns to search for, and, of course, in interpret- ing findings. And as Katz (198 1: 121) points out, in simple cases, intuitive semantic judgements are perfectly clear: crowd and mob both express group action, and both are antonymous with solo in this respect; naked nude is redundant; and Jones mur- dered Smith entails Jones killed Smith. It is unnecessary to demand corpus evidence for such facts. However, if all meanings were accessible to native speaker intuition, then these meanings would be recorded in dictionaries. But corpora show that even highly trained lexicographers have, in the past, not spotted semantic patterns which are rather obvious when the right data are available. Many patterns, particularly con- cerning connotations, are not recorded in pre-corpus dictionaries: discussion of methods of analysis and detailed examples are given by Sinclair (1991), Louw (1993) Stubbs (1995), Channel1 (2000) and others. These studies demonstrate that semantic data are provided by the collocations in which words regularly occur. Words tend to collocate with other words from restricted semantic sets, and this pro- vides observable evidence of word meanings, both denotation and connotation; the evidence must, of course, be interpreted by the linguist. The collocational patterns are not derivable from single instances (invented or attested), but only from repeated instances across a corpus (Sinclair, 1991: 69ff.; De Beaugrande, 1999; Channell, 2000). And although the patterns are often obvious in retrospect, they are not ac- cessible to intuition in advance. Nor is this a new approach to meaning. For centuries it has motivated the con- struction of concordances for culturally important books. A famous concordance for the Bible was published by Alexander Cruden in 1737, with the explicit aim of showing how words were used, and thereby providing a tool to investigate their meanings. His concordance shows not only individual words and phrases in their con- text, but also some collocations between content words, such dry ground and dry land (Cruden, 1833). (Other concordances for versions of the Bible in Latin, Greek 10 M. Stubbs I Lingua 112 (2002) 7-11 and other languages had appeared from at least the 1200s.) This approach to mean- ing is often referred to, in a shorthand slogan, as ‚meaning is use™. It underlies the construction of the Oxford English Dictionary, and in different ways the principle was later discussed by Wittgenstein, Firth and Austin: further large bodies of work to which BI do not refer. To conclude, BI point to areas where debate is certainly needed, but this debate must be based on an accurate assessment of (1) the intensive discussions within applied linguistics since the 1970s (2) the foundational work in corpus linguistics, and (3) approaches to meaning as use, which go back to concrete techniques of text analysis in the 1700s which were discussed explicitly from the 1930s and which have been given a new lease of life by technological developments since the 1980s. The empirical findings and theoretical claims of corpus study must be tested by looking seriously at the best descriptions and theoretical statements available, and there is no shortage of either. Distinctions such as mainstream/marginal are of no value: they merely signal approval or disapproval. Would it not be more useful to compare and assess different approaches? For example : - Why not compare the different models of grammar which have recently given a much more central place to lexis and phraseology? These include ‚word-gram- mar™ (Hudson), ‚emergent grammar™ (Hopper, Bybee), ‚construction grammar™ (Fillmore, Kay), and ‚lexico-grammar™ (Halliday, Sinclair). - Why not take substantial and innovative ‚corpus-driven™ grammars (e.g. Francis et al., 1996, 1998) and evaluate their empirical findings and their implications for grammatical theory? - Why not contrast and relate evidence from different sources: introspective data (from the linguist her/himself), elicited data (from experimental subjects), and corpus data (randomly sampled from large numbers of speakers)? Why not inves- tigate why these data are sometimes contradictory, but nevertheless systematically related? Discussion of such questions would take the debate forward in a way which is pre- cise and reasoned, and not merely polemical. References Biber, D., 1988. Variation across speech and writing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Biber, D., S. Johansson, G. Leech, S. Conrad and E. Finegan, 1999. Longman grammar of spoken and written English. London: Longman. Borsley, R.D. and R. Ingham, 2001. Grow your own linguistics? On some applied linguists™ views of the subject. Lingua 112(l) 14. Chamrell, J., 2000. Corpus-based analysis of evaluative lexis. In: S. Hunston and G. Thompson (eds.), Evaluation in text: Authorial stance and the construction of discourse, 38-55. Oxford: Oxford Uni- versity Press. Cruden, A., 1833. A complete concordance to the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. 10th edition. London: Tegg. [lst edition 1737.1 M. Stuhhs I Lingua 112 (2002) 7-11 11 De Beaugrande, R., 1999. Reconnecting real language with real text: Text linguistics and corpus lin- guistics International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 4(I), 243-259. Francis, G., S. Hunston and E. Manning, 1996. Grammar patterns 1: Verbs. London: Harper Collins. Francis, G., S. Hunston and E. Manning, 1998. Grammar patterns 2: Nouns and adjectives. London: Harper Collins. Hunston, S. and G. Francis, 1999. Pattern grammar: A corpus-driven approach to the lexical grammar of English. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Katz, J.J., 1981. Language and other abstract objects. Oxford: Blackwell. Kennedy, G., 1998. An introduction to corpus linguistics. London: Longman. Kilgarriff, A., 1997. Putting frequencies in the dictionary. International Journal of Lexicography 10(2), 135-155. Louw, B., 1993. Irony in the text or insincerity in the writer? The diagnostic potential of semantic prosodies. In: M. Baker, G. Francis and E. Tognini-Bonelli (eds.), Text and technology, 157-176. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Sampson, G., 1995. English for the computer. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Sinclair, J., 1991. Corpus, concordance, collocation. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Sinclair, J. et al., 1990 Collins Cobuild English Grammar. London: HarperCollins. Stubbs, M., 1995. Collocations and semantic profiles: On the cause of the trouble with quantitative stud- ies. Functions of Language 2(l), 23-55. Widdowson, H.G., 1980. Models and fictions. Applied Linguistics l(2), 165-170. 