ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 27-58 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua The structures of the to-infinitive* Brett Hyde* Department of Linguistics, Rutgers University, 18 Seminary Place, New Brunswick, NJ 08903. USA Received 23 November 1998; revised version 12 June 1999 Abstract This article presents an approach to the English to-infinitive where to is a preposition with a bare infinitive complement and ECM and object control complements receive a small clause analysis. Crucial to this approach is the positioning of PRO, which always occurs in the sub- ject position of to™s complement. This positioning allows a complementary distribution of PRO, lexical NPs, and NP-trace. The distribution of these elements, in conjunction with the small clause approach, creates multiple advantages including the elimination of current incon- sistencies in the theory of null case, the reduction of control to anaphoric binding, and a gen- eral and uniform theory of complementation. 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Infinitive; PRO; Complementation 1. Introduction Currently, the literature recognizes two types of English infinitive: the bare infini- tive, exemplified in (la), and the to-infinitive, exemplified in (lb). (1) a. John saw [Bill win the race] b. John expected [Bill to win the race] * I would like to acknowledge the contributions of Professor Mario Pellicciarro of Washington and Lee University. Many of the main ideas contained in this article originated in our discussions. I would also like to acknowledge the assistance of the committee at Rutgers University who advised me while writing the original paper: Professors Maria Bittner, Hubert Truckenbrodt, and especially Ken Safir, my primary advisor, who worked very closely with me throughout the project. * Phone: +I 732 932-289; Fax: +I 732 9321370; E-mail: bhyde@rci.rutgers.edu 0024-3841/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(99)0003 l-5 28 B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 The proposed account reanalyzes the to-infinitive and eliminates it as a separate class. As illustrated in (2), the proposed structure of the to-infinitive is a preposition to with a bare infinitive complement. Bare infinitives are assumed to be simple VPs, and, in the to-infinitive construction, PRO always occurs as the VP subject. (2) [rp to Lvp PRO [v™ verb [ XP 1111 Although I will continue to use the term to-infinitive, the actual infinitive is to™s complement. To is not part of the infinitive itself. In this account, the (2) structure can be the complement of either an abstract verb, as in (3a,c), or a lexical verb, as in (3e,g). Examples (3b,d,f,h), illustrate the corre- sponding traditional structures. (3) a. Agnes expected [sc Billi (abstract verb) [pp to [vp PROi win the race]]] b. Agnes expected [ir Billi [it to [vp ti win the race]]] c. Agnes ordered [sc Bill, (abstract verb) [pp to [vr PROi win the race]]] il. Agnes ordered Bill, [ip PROi [i, to [vp ti win the race]]] e. Agnes, tried [rp to [vp PROi win the race]] f. Agnes, tried [ip PROi [i, to [vp ti win the race]]] g. Agnes, seemed [rp to [vp PRO, win the race]] h. Agnes, seemed [ip ti [i, to [vp ti win the race]]] Example (3a), traditionally an ECM construction, parallels (3c), traditionally an object control construction. The matrix verbs both take small clause complements. Example (3e), traditionally a subject control construction, parallels (3g), traditionally a raising construction. The matrix verbs both take PP complements. This approach will be demonstrated to have several advantages. First, the posi- tioning of PRO establishes a complementary distribution of PRO, lexical NPs, and NP-trace, which allows a consistency in case theory lacking since the introduction of null case. Second, Object Control and Subject Control reduce to a single phenome- non. Control is an anaphoric binding relation between a control verb™s subject and a PRO element contained in the control verb™s complement. Third, the approach allows a highly general, uniform theory of complement selection. The class of verbs under consideration have two main options: they select either PP complements or small clause complements. Specifically, verbs select the class of preposition or abstract verb that heads their complement. I will use the following terminology in the remainder of the article. The terms ECM, object control, subject control, and raising refer only to the associated tradi- tional structures, for example (3b,d,f,h). To distinguish between the different cases when discussing the proposed structures, the term E-verb will refer to traditional ECM verbs, the term O-verb to traditional object control verbs, the term S-verb to traditional subject control verbs, and the term R-verb to traditional raising verbs. The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 briefly examines some approaches to small clauses and outlines the one to be adopted. Section 3 outlines a small clause B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 3-9 approach to double object and prepositional object constructions. The proposed structures will have important parallels to the ones proposed for the to-infinitive. The small clause analysis will be extended to the to-infinitive in sections 4 and 5. Section 4 examines interpretational considerations, and section 5 explores case considera- tions. Section 6 examines both anaphoric binding in object constructions and control in the to-infinitive, exploring the parallel of these two relations. Section 7 deals with issues of complement selection, and section 8 establishes independent evidence for the proposed analysis. 2. Small clause structures As small clause structure is crucial to the proposed account, it is important to note at the outset exactly what the small clause is and what structure is assumed in the analysis. The canonical small clause is the type of construction in (4) where inrelli- gent is predicated of John. (4) Henry considers [sc John intelligent] The internal structure of the small clause has been much discussed in the literature. and den Dikken (1995) recognizes three basic proposals. The examples in (5) are borrowed from den Dikken and the paragraph that follows summarizes his discus- sion. (See the source for a more detailed examination and references.) (5) a. [xr subject [x, predicate]] b. [xp subject [xr predicate]] c. [Fp subject [F F [xp predicate]]] Structure (5a) is Stowell™s (1981, 1983) proposal, which argued that the small clause is a projection of its lexical head, whatever its category might be. Stowell™s structure encountered objections that the predicate, which is X™, could not undergo movement given the assumption of Chomsky (1986a) that only heads and maximal projections may move. Structure (5b), where the predicate is an XP, with the small clause being an XP of the same category, allows the predicate to move. Den Dikken pursues pro- posal (5~) where small clauses are FCs, a projection of some type of functional head with an XP complement. This option also allows the predicate to move. The configuration I will adopt is most like (5c), in that small clauses contain more structure than is obvious. Somewhat following Kayne (1984) and Hoekstra ( 1995). the small clause is a VP headed by an abstract verb: ™ (6) [vp subject [v, (abstract verb) lxp predicate111 ™ This is not to say that additional structure might not be associated with a small clause - or a bare infinitive. A Minimalist framework would seem to require at least Agrp and possibly TP. (See Collins and Thrainsson, 1996, for some discussion along these lines.) 30 B. Hyde/Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 This approach has two advantages. First, it avoids Stowell™s movement problem, since the predicate is a maximal projection. Second, it gives all small clauses a uni- form structure and categorial status. The particular versions of (6) that will be used in this account are given in (7). (7) a. [vp subject [,,, (abstract verb) [ NP I]] b. [vr subject [,,, (abstract verb) [rp P [ XP I]]] Structure (7a) is manifested in the double object construction. Structure (7b) is mani- fested in both the prepositional object construction and the small clause to-infinitive. The only difference between (7a) and (7b) is in the category of their complements. 3. Object constructions As this analysis proposes important configurational parallels between object con- structions and the to-infinitive, it is crucial that the structure of object constructions be explored. The purpose of this section is to flesh out and justify, building on work by Kayne (1984) and Hoekstra (1995), a small clause analysis of object construc- tions incorporating (7a,b). Kayne (1984), which gives a small clause analysis of the double object construction, incorporates (7a). Kayne considers the possibility that small clauses have abstract verbs and argues that, if an abstract verb were present, it would probably be neutral between be and have, accounting both for the double object and the canonical small clause. Extending the class of abstract verbs, however, and utilizing the (7b) structure provides a simple account of a set of constructions enlarged to include dative and other prepositional objects. Positing a motion verb, such as go, reveals a straightfor- ward pattern where dative prepositional objects align with other prepositional object constructions rather than with the double object construction: (8) a. Steve threw [sc Jerry (have) the ball] b. Steve threw [sc the ball (go) to Jerry] c. Steve threw [sc the ball (go) toward Jerry] d. Steve threw [sc the ball (go) near Jerry] e. Steve threw [sc the ball (go) to the ground] Although an interpretive similarity exists between the dative prepositional and dou- ble object constructions of (Sa,b) - both emphasize the close proximity of Jerry and the ball and imply that he caught it - the proposed account divides the examples along structural lines, corresponding to a distinction that is much cleaner. Sentence (8a), whose small clause has abstract have and an NP complement, emphasizes who has or was intended to have the ball, while (W-e), whose small clauses have abstract go and PP complements, emphasize where the ball went or was intended to go. Under this account, the interpretive similarity of (8a,b) is only incidental. The approach is justified in comparing (8a,b) to the well known contrast between pairs B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 31 like (9). (See Green, 1974; Hoekstra, 1978; Pinker, 1989; den D&ken, 1995; and Pesetsky, 1995, among others, for discussion of pairs of this type.) (9) a. *Steve threw [sc the ground (have) the ball] b. Steve threw [sc the ball (go) to the ground] Unlike the indirect object in (8a,b), which may either precede or follow the direct object, the indirect object in (9a,b) cannot precede the direct object due to the selec- tional restrictions that abstract have places on its subject position. The ground can- not be a possessor of the ball in (9a) as Jerry can in (8a). It is clear from these exam- ples that double object and prepositional object constructions have significant interpretive differences* and that the pattern defined by the proposed analysis seems to draw the correct distinctions. Similar considerations actually motivate a separation between abstract be and abstract have, at least in English. Positing a neutral be/have element predicts that the selectional restrictions for a canonical small clause would be identical to the selec- tional restrictions of the double object. This is clearly not the case: (10) a. Bill considered [sc the ground (be/have) fertile] b. *Steve threw the [sc the ground (be/have) the ball] In (lOa), the ground can appear as the subject of the canonical small clause. In fact, nearly any NP can appear in this position. But, in (lob), the ground cannot appear as the subject of the small clause double object construction. The selectional restric- tions of the canonical small clause, then, should not be taken to originate from the same element as the selectional restrictions of the double object. ? Recent work by den Dikken encounters a problem as a result of these differences. Den Dikken ( 1995) is similar to recent proposals in Kayne (1993, 1995) which is built on work by Freeze (1992). Den Dikken pursues a small clause analysis which incorporates the idea that he + fo is spelled out as /ruin. Double object and dative object constructions are related by a dative shift he/have alternation. Without going into too much detail, the dative prepositional object construction has an abstract verb he with a to- PP complement. In the double object construction, where the dative object shifts to become subject of the small clause, there is an empty preposition in place of to which incorporates into ha. This incorpo- rated structure is abstract have. Den Dikken assumes that the O-roles assigned to the direct object and indirect object in both types of constructions are uniform, allowing him to avoid any conflicts with the Uniformity of Theta Assignment Hypothesis (see Baker, 1988). He acknowledges, however, that this assumption is somewhat questionable as evidenced by the following pairs, which are similar to those in (8a,b) and (9). (i) John sent a package to the boarder. John sent the boarder a package. (ii) John sent a package to the border. *John sent the border a package. Since I find this problem a little more disturbing than den Dikken does. I have not adopted the abstract verb analysis in this form. It is also unclear how the larger pattern of (8) could be captured with a dative shift approach. (For additional proposals with contentful abstract verbs see Abney, 1987, and Aoun and Li, 1989.) 32 B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 Support for an abstract verb analysis of object constructions comes from their pat- terns of passivization (see Hoekstra, 1995). If abstract verbs assign accusative case to their NP complements, and matrix verbs assign accusative case to their comple- ment subject, a small clause analysis explains why a direct object cannot become the subject of a passive construction unless the indirect object is prepositional: (11) a. Jerryi was thrown [sc ti (have) the ball] b. *The ball, was thrown [sc Jerry (have) ti] C. The ball, was thrown [sc ti (go) to Jerry] Sentences (1 la,b) show movement out of the small clause Isc Jerry (have) the ball]. In (1 la), the NP Jerry moves to the matrix subject position because the passive verb cannot assign accusative case. Sentence (1 lb) is ungrammatical because the wrong NP, the ball, moves and Jerry remains in a non-case position. Example (1 lc) shows movement out of the small clause lsc the ball (go) to Jerry]. The preposition assigns case to Jerry, but the bull moves to the matrix subject position for nominative case. Interpretive patterns and case considerations, then, both support the abstract verb analysis as presented in (7).3 This is not to say, however, that small clause structure is the only structure associated with object constructions. In section 6, we shall see that, for certain cases, other configurations are not only possible but also necessary. 4. Interpretations of to-infinitive complements The types of considerations - interpretational and case - that supported the small clause analysis of object constructions also support extending the small clause analy- sis to to-infinitive constructions. This means assigning to-infinitives the types of structures in (3a,c,e,g), repeated here as (12a-d). (12) a. Agnes expected [sc Bill, (abstract verb) ipp to lvp PROi win the race111 b. Agnes ordered [sc Bill, (abstract verb) [pp to [vp PROi win the race111 C. Agnesi tried [rp to [vp PROi win the race]] d. Agnes, seemed [rp to [vp PROi win the race]] Given that the proposed E-verb and O-verb structures parallel prepositional object structures in utilizing the configuration in (7b), the small clause analysis of the to- infinitive can be seen as a natural next step from the small clause analysis of object constructions. ™ Another possibility that should be noted is one where abstract verbs are simply traces of matrix verbs in a Larsonian sense (see Larson, 1988 and 1990 and, for similar proposals, Johnson, 1991; Bowers, 1993). This could certainly maintain the structural requirements outlined above for case assignment. Still, the problems with UTAH for the Larsonian approach, noted by Aoun and Li (1989), Jackendoff (1990), and den Dikken (1995), make it considerably less appealing. Also, a Larsonian approach would be unworkable in extending the small clause analysis to the to-infinitive (see footnote 4). B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 33 The interpretational concerns that motivate this analysis arise primarily from the distribution of PRO and lexical anaphors. Under the assumption that PRO and anaphors like herself are both variables and that the semantics interprets them in an identical fashion, current structural analyses incorrectly predict that the sentences in (13) have identical interpretations, since both PRO and herself are indexed to Agnes and both occupy the same position. (13) a. Agnes, expects [PROi to win the race] b. Agnes, expects [herself, to win the race] Contrary to the prediction, sentences of this type do have differences in interpreta- tion. Example (13a) means simply that Agnes is confident that she is the one who will win the race. Example (13b) may have two readings. The first reading is similar to the indirect thought reading noted in Higginbotham (1992) and exemplified by a sentence like (14). (14) Agnes, expects that shei will win the race In (13a), Agnes must believe that she is the one who will win the race. In (13b) and (14) it is only necessary for Agnes to believe some lesser condition. For example, she could believe that the fastest person, the luckiest person, or the person who trained the hardest will win the race. If Agnes is that person, then one could say that Agnes expects herself to win the race or Agnes expects that she will win the race. The second reading of (13b) I will refer to as the ‚separated subject™ reading, since the subject of the complement is given a relation to the infinitive event that is exter- nal to participation in the event itself. Under this reading of (13b), Agnes feels some sort of obligation to win the race, but she need not believe that she actually will win. Contrast this to the reading of (13a), where Agnes does believe that she will win the race but need not feel any responsibility to do so. This distinction is even more clearly illustrated by the difference between (15a), which exhibits a reading parallel to (13a), and (15b), which exhibits the separated subject reading parallel to (13b). (15) a. Agnes expects to be honest. b. Agnes expects herself to be honest, In (15a), Agnes believes that she will have a moment of honesty at some point in the future, but she is not obligating herself to being honest. In (15b), Agnes is giving herself the responsibility of being honest, perhaps as a personal standard, but she need not believe that she actually will be honest. Under the separated subject read- ing of (13b/15b), then, herself seems to be as much the bearer of a responsibility with respect to winning the race or being honest as the anticipated perpetrator of either race-winning or honesty. This distinction between (13a/15a) and (13b/lSb) can be appropriately paraphrased as Agnes expected something vs. Agnes expected something of herself. 34 B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 These interpretational variations are not limited to expect. The want constructions in (16) are similar. (16) a. Agnes wanted to throw up. b. Agnes wanted herself to throw up. Example (16a) has only one reading. It implies that Agnes has the urge to throw up. She may be sick. Sentence (16b) has two readings. First, it has the indirect thought reading. For example, if Agnes wants the most annoying person to throw up, and Agnes is the most annoying person, then one could say that Agnes wants herself to throw up. Second, (16b) has the separated subject reading, which does not express the direct urge that (16a) does. Rather it expresses a type of introspection on Agnes™s part. Agnes wishes that she would throw up, but it does not imply that she has the immediate urge to do so. We can paraphrase this distinction between (16a) and (16b) as Agnes wanted something vs. Agnes wanted something of herself. There are two types of readings, then, for want and expect constructions when the subjects of their to-infinitive complements are lexical anaphors: the indirect thought reading and the separated subject reading. The indirect thought reading illustrates that, with respect to the traditional analysis, it makes no difference whether the com- plements of want and expect are IPs or CPs. If the distinction were to be drawn along these lines, we might reasonably, but falsely, expect that (13a/16a) rather than (13b/16b) would exhibit the indirect thought reading, since (13a/16a) are tradition- ally more parallel to (14) in that they would have CP complements. Although it is reasonable to believe that the difference between IPs and CPs may be associated with interpretive distinctions, it is clear that the distinctions we are considering are not determined by this difference. To illustrate how the proposed structures might create the indirect thought dis- tinction, we can consider (17), where (17a,b) both have the indirect thought reading but (17~) does not. (17) a. Agnes, expects [cp that shei will win the race] b. Agnes, expects [sc herself, (abstract verb) [PP to [vp PROi win the race]]] C. Agnes, expects [rp to [vp PRO, win the race]] In the proposed structures, an obvious difference is that the complements of (17a,b) are clausal while the complement of (17~) is prepositional. Also, the complement of (17a) is tensed and the complement of (17b) has an abstract verb, while the comple- ment of (17~) is not tensed and has no abstract verb. The tense of (17a) and the abstract verb of (17b) are an important parallel. There are certainly ample candidates for abstract verbs that have modal effects similar to tense - . . . ought (to) . . . , . . . has (to) . . ., . . . is (to) . . ., and . . . happens (to) . . . to illustrate a few.4 Given their parallel Abstract verbs must be contentful and independent of matrix verbs. They cannot be traces of matrix verbs in the Larsonian sense, since, in certain cases, there is no higher verb that the abstract verb could be a trace of. This is true, for example, of small clause to-infinitive subjects: (i) For [sc John (abstract verb) to leave ] would be a catastrophe Thanks to Graham Horwood for pointing this out. B. Hyde I Linguu 110 (1999) 27-58 35 status in having clausal complements and their potentially parallel tense/mood effects, the interpretations of (17a) and (17b) should be more similar to each other than to (17~). The separated subject reading shows how the proposed structures allow PRO and lexical anaphors to appear in similar constructions with distinct interpretations, while still assuming that the semantics interprets these individual elements identically. To illustrate this more clearly, consider a verb like help, which may take either a bare infinitive complement with a lexical subject or a to-infinitive complement with a lex- ical subject. Help, like want and expect, may have the separated subject reading depending on its complement structure. The difference is especially clear when the help supplied may be either involvement in the actual event or some type of prepara- tory help: (18) a. Mary helped John make the tough decision. b. Mary helped John to make the tough decision. Sentence (18a) gives the impression that Mary took part in the decision making process. Sentence (18b), which exhibits the separated subject reading, gives the impression that John made the decision on his own, but Mary enabled him to make it, perhaps by encouraging him or lending some type of moral support. In (18b), John is more than just the subject of make the tough decision. There is an additional relationship between John and the decision making act, perhaps expressing ability to perform the act, and it is this relationship that Mary helps. The same type of distinc- tion occurs in pairs like Mary helped John begin the difficult project vs. Mary helped John to begin the difficult project. In help constructions, then, we have the same phenomenon as in the want and expect constructions. Elements that should have the same individual interpretation appear as the complement subjects of two very similar constructions with slightly different interpretations. This time, however, the two elements are actually the single element John. Expect, want, and help constructions each exhibit the separated subject reading only when they have a to-infinitive complement with a lexical subject. Now compare the differences between (19a-c), the proposed structures for complements that do not have the separated subject reading, and (19d-f), the proposed structures for comple- ments that do have the separated subject reading. (19) a. Agnes helped [John win the race] b. Agnes, expected to [PROi win the race] C. Agnes, wanted to [PRO, win the race] d. Agnes helped [Johni (abstract verb) to PROi win the race] e. Agnes, expected [herself, (abstract verb) to PROi win the race] f. Agnes, wanted [herself, (abstract verb) to PROi win the race] The complements of (19d-f) are all small clause to-infinitives, and the complements of (19a-c) are a bare infinitive and simple PP to-infinitives. The contrast, then, is 36 B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 between infinitives that are contained in a larger small clause structure and those that are not. The separated subject reading is available to small clause to-infinitive com- plements but not to bare infinitive or simple PP to-infinitive complements. Also note the complementary distribution of PRO and lexical anaphors. PRO always occurs in the subject position of the actual infinitive, parallel to John in (19a), but herself always occurs in the subject position of the small clause, parallel to John in (19d). Given these differences, it is not difficult to see why complements with lexical anaphor subjects may have the separated subject reading, but complements with PRO subjects may not. The relationship of herself to the to-infinitive in (19e), for example, is different than the relationship of PRO to the to-infinitive in (19b). In the (19b) sentence, the PP to-infinitive occurs as the matrix verb™s direct comple- ment. PRO occurs as the subject of win the race, and PRO (Agnes) win the race is what Agnes expects. In (19e), the complementary distribution of PRO and lexical anaphors comes into play. Again, PRO - not herself - is the subject of win the race. Herself has a separate relation with the to-infinitive, mediated by the abstract verb. This relation - not simply PRO (Agnes) win the race - is what Agnes expects. Under this account, then, the interpretive distinctions between PRO and lexical anaphors arise from significant differences between the types of structures in which they occur and not from a difference in how they are interpreted individ- ually. Although I have mentioned a few candidates, pinpointing the content of the abstract verb or verbs, and therefore the exact nature of the meaning relation, is extremely difficult, especially since abstract verbs need not have any exact lexical correspondent. The themes that we have focused on, however - clausal vs. PP struc- ture, the presence or absence of abstract verbs, and the distribution of PRO and lex- ical anaphors - illustrate that the differences in the proposed structures might rea- sonably account for the interpretive variations. 5. Null case and the distribution of PRO A complementary distribution of PRO and lexical NPs is important not only for maintaining appropriate distinctions in meaning, but also for eliminating current inconsistencies in case theory. BoSkoviC (1996) is a recent theory of complement selection that illustrates these inconsistencies. 5.1. Complement selection in Bo$koviC (1996) BoSkoviC (1996) builds on Stowell (1982) and Martin (1992). In his theory, case checking determines when a complement may have a PRO subject. Verbs s-select for either a propositional complement or a nonpropositional, which he refers to as irreafis, complement. Only propositional complements may be specified for truth or falsity at the time of the utterance. He gives the following pair to illustrate: John believed Peter to have played football, which was false vs. *John tried to play foot- ball, which was false. B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 31 BoSkoviC argues that ECM verbs like believe s-select propositional complements, and control verbs like Q s-select irrealis complements. All infinitives are [-Finite], but when a complement must be propositional, it is realized as [-Tense], and when it must be irrealis, it is realized as [+Tense]. [+Tense] infinitives are not specified as either past or present, giving rise to their interpretation as unrealized with respect to the tense of the matrix verb. In BoSkoviC™s account, [+Tense] to checks null case via Spec Head Agreement, but [-Tense] to does not check case at all. So, PRO appears as the complement sub- ject in control constructions like (20a,b),5 and a lexical NP appears as the comple- ment subject in ECM constructions like (20~). (20) a. John tried [PRO to leave] b. John persuaded Mary [PRO to leave] c. John believed [Bill to be an idiot] A problem arises, however, when PRO and lexical NPs are in overlapping dis- tribution: (21) a. Mary wants/prefers [PRO to leave] b. Mary wants/prefers [for [John to leave]] c. Mary wants/prefers [John to leave] Since want and prefer complements are irrealis, in the (21) examples, to must be [+Tense] and must check null case in its specifier position. This gives the correct result for (21a). Sentence (21b) can be accounted for if John has its case checked in situ, perhaps under a preposition/inherent case checking relation.6 The main diffi- s A lexical NP in the complement subject position of control verbs like try is ruled out by Last Resort, since the NP would originate in a case checking position but would have to raise for accusative case checking. 6 BoSkoviC makes a different proposal following Watanabe. (1993) that is more problematic. His pro- posal is that for originates in Infl in a for-lo complex. The case of the lexical NP subject is checked via SHA with the&-m complex and then for raises to Comp. I assume that by ‚for-to complex™ BoSkovi6 and Watanabe have in mind some type of adjunction structure. If this is true, then only the features of one could project. The evidence from afor-ro dialect cited by Watanabe (see also Henry, 1992) suggests that, in for-lo complexes, it is the features of to that project. (i) a. I believe them for to have done it. b. *I believe for them to have done it. (ii) For to pay the mortgage is difficult. (iii) John seems for to be better. (iv) a. For him to pay the mortgage would be just as expensive. b. *Him for to pay the mortgage would be just as expensive. In (ia), we see that the tense specification, presumably a property of to, would have to project in order to determine whether or not null case is checked. In this situation, it is clear that for remains in the com- plex. Only in (iva), where for checks accusative case, is it apparent that for moves. This seems to be becausefor™s features do not project in thefor-to complex, meaning that the case of the complement sub- ject in (iva) cannot be checked via SHA with the complex, but only by for from the higher position. 38 B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 culty is (21c), since John is in a null case checking position but must raise to Spec Agro for accusative case checking, a violation of Last Resort. BoSkoviC offers the familiar proposal that there is actually a null complementizer, parallel to for, that checks case in constructions like (21~). Although he notes that passive raising may be ruled out independently for want, BoSkovic claims that the impossibility of passive raising from want and prefer infinitive complements sup- ports the null complementizer analysis. The following data suggest otherwise: (22) a. *It was preferred John to leave. b. It was preferred for John to leave. c. Wedding dresses are preferred to be white. Meetings are preferred to be short. First, if a null complementizer actually checks case for John, then (22a) should be as good as (22b). Also, (22~) shows that passive raising actually does occur with pre- fer. It seems, then, that in (21c), accusative case is checked not by a null comple- mentizer but by the matrix verb.™ This is a serious problem for BoSkoviC™s analysis, since case checking by the matrix verb is ruled out by Last Resort. A similar difficulty arises with expect. In (23), PRO and himself are in overlap- ping distribution. (23) a. John expected [PRO to play football] b. John expected [himself to play football] Citing the lexical ambiguity of expect argued for in Bresnan (1972), BoSkoviC asserts that this distribution is easily accounted for. But even granted that the ambi- guity exists, it is far from obvious how it helps his account. The complement of (23b) is irrealis: (24) *John expected himself to play football, which was false. Since the complement of expect in (23b) must be [+Tense], himself is in a null case checking position but must raise to have accusative case checked, violating Last Resort. BoSkoviC™s problem arises because to checks null case leftward via SHA for the PRO that immediately precedes it. If to checked case to the right and PRO appeared in the position suggested in the proposed analysis, this problem would disappear. To would be less likely to be an Infl, however, and some additional story would be needed about the tense of infinitives. ™ BoSkoviC cites Lasnik and Saito (1991) to support the null complementizer analysis. Lasnik and Saito argue that the subjects of want complements do not raise into the matrix clause at LF. Although this could be an argument that a null complementizer assigns case to these elements, it is an equally strong argument simply that SHA is not the mechanism that want uses to check case. Given this and the evi- dence from prefer constructions, the null complementizer is best abandoned. B. Hyde I Lingua I10 (1999) 27-58 39 5.2. Overcoming null case inconsistencies The proposed analysis has motivated a complementary distribution of PRO and lexical NPs, making it possible to eliminate null case inconsistencies. In this account, case remains basically a three way distinction: structural case, null case, and absence of case. The only modifications made to the usual analysis are the posi- tions in which these cases are assigned.8 Note in (25) that to assigns null case right- ward. (25) Case assignment conditions a. Only prepositions like to may assign null case across a VP boundary. b. Only verbs and prepositions likefor may assign accusative case across a VP boundary. The conditions in (25) insure that only PRO can occur in Spec VP when the VP is the complement of to. This is illustrated in (26a, b). (26) a. b. C. d. ;: John expected to [,,r PRO win the race] *John expected to [vr himself win the race] John ordered [sc Bill to PRO win the race] *John ordered [sc PRO to win the race] John hoped for [sc Bill to PRO win the race] *John hoped for [sc PRO to win the race] They also insure that the subjects of small clauses are lexical when the small clause occurs as the complement of a verb, as shown in (26c,d), or the preposition for, as shown in (26e,f).9 x Formulating these conditions in terms of case assignment allows me to simplify the discussion of complement selection in section 7, as I will not have to involve Agrp or TP. Note, however, that it would not be too difficult to formulate these conditions in terms of case checking. Either way, given the posi- tioning of PRO, the proposed structures would suffer neither violations of Last Resort in a Minimalist account nor doubly case-marked chains in a Government and Binding account. Also, note in advance that, with respect to complement selection, it is not crucial that Agrp and TP be absent in small clauses or infinitives. Giving them significant treatment, however, would expand the discussion too far beyond the main points. 9 An anonymous reviewer points out that John hoped for to win fhe race, corresponding to (26f), is acceptable in for-to dialects. This can be accounted for by following Watanabe (1993) and BoSkoviC (1996) in that for-to in these dialects is a complex, perhaps an adjunction structure with the features of to projecting (see footnote 6). This proposal, however, would differ from theirs in two ways. First, the complex would be placed in the head of a prepositional phrase rather than in Infl. A sentence like John hoped for to win the race would have the following type of structure: (i) John hoped [rp [r for to ] [vp PRO win the race I] Second, when for must check case, as in For Bill to win the race would be dificult, it would not do so via SHA from within afor-ro complex. For would have to assign case in accordance with (25b) from the higher position. Note that in this instance, however, it is not crucial to the proposed account whether for moves to its higher position from a for-to complex or simply originates in this position. 40 B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 The constructions that were problematic for BoSkoviC, (21~) and (23b), are given in (27) with their proposed structures. (27) a. Mary wants/prefers [sc John (abstract verb) [pp to lvp PRO leave]]] b. John expected [sc himself (abstract verb) [pp to [vp PRO play football]]] In (27a) want/prefer assigns accusative case to John, the small clause subject, and to assigns null case to PRO, the subject of the infinitive. In (27b), expect assigns case to himself, the small clause subject, and co assigns case to PRO, the subject of the infinitive. There is never more than one element assigning case to any particular chain or to any particular position. Specifically, there is never an element assigning null case to a position in which lexical NPs originate. The inconsistencies suffered in BoSkoviC™s account are completely avoided. Although the conditions in (25) are quite informal and certainly not the correct formulation (see footnote 8), for the purposes of this article, I am content to argue for the complementary distribution of PRO and lexical NPs and to establish the posi- tions in which their cases are assigned. This in itself is not an insignificant step, as we have seen in BoSkoviC™s account. 6. Binding and control We noted in section 2 the similarities between the proposed structures for double object, prepositional object, and to-infinitive constructions. There are also similari- ties between the behavior of anaphors in object constructions and PRO in to-infini- tive constructions. We will see in this section that these similarities are, in fact, the same phenomenon and that control can be reduced to anaphoric binding. I will examine the simplest cases first and then proceed to the more complex. 6.1. Straighiforward cases Throughout this section, I will use the formulation in (28a) for Principle A, which is given in terms of a ‚local domain™. The local domain is a Governing Category, as defined in (28b). Both definitions are borrowed from Chomsky and Lasnik (1993): (28) a. Principle A An anaphor must be bound in a local domain. b. Governing Category The governing category (GC) of c1 is the minimal clause containing a and a governor of a. This formulation is not the final or most precise given by Chomsky and Lasnik, but it is sufficient for my purposes here. We will not consider phenomena that motivate a revised definition. B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 41 Anaphoric binding in the small clause analysis of object constructions is always between an anaphor and a local subject antecedent. For example, between a matrix subiect and a matrix NP complement, as in (29a); between a matrix subject and a matrix PP complement, as in (29b); between a small clause subject clause PP complement, as in (29~); or between a matrix subject and a subject, as in (29d). and a small small clause (29) a. Johni hit himself, b. Johni talked about himself, C. John told [sc Maryi (abstract verb) about herself,] d. Johni threw [sc himself, (abstract verb) the ball ] In (29a,b,d), the governing category is the sentence, and in (29c), it is the small clause complement of told. The governing category is the local domain, and the anaphor in each example has an antecedent within its local domain. In the small clause analysis of to-infinitives, controli is similarly straightforward, as it has only one configuration. Control is a relation between a subject and a PRO element in a PP to-infinitive complement: Control Relation i (30) subject [v, verb [rp to [vp ‚PRO [vverb [XP]]]]] This is parallel to the anaphoric binding relations of (29b, c) where a subject antecedent binds an anaphor in a local PP complement. Although there have been some attempts to reduce control to a single principle in one way or another (see Manzini, 1983; Bouchard, 1983 and Borer, 1989) tradi- tional accounts have usually divided control into two types: Subject Control, where the PRO element is bound by the matrix subject, and Object Control, where the PRO element is bound by the matrix object. In the proposed account, the control relation is the same whether it occurs in a complement or in a matrix clause. When verbs, whether lexical or abstract, take PP to-infinitive complements, they are control verbs, simply because to assigns the type of case that requires PRO to occur, and the verb provides a local subject to act as PRO™s antecedent: Iﬂ At this point, the status of control in the Minimalist Program seems unclear. (28). the formulation for anaphoric binding to which control will be reduced, is stated in terms of government, which has a sig- nificantly diminished status. Note, however, that the configuration for control outlined in this proposal is a fairly local subject to subject relationship. It should not be too difficult to adapt to Minimalist formu- lations as they become clearer. 42 B. Hyde I Lingua I10 (1999) 27-58 (31) a. John, tried to PRO, leave b. Bill ordered [Johni (abstract verb) to PROi leave] C. Billi expected to PROi leave d. Bill expected [John, (abstract verb) to PROi leave] e. Bill hoped for [John (abstract verb) to PROi leave] f. Ann, seemed to PROi be happy In (31a), traditionally a subject control construction, the control verb is a lexical S- verb. In (31b), traditionally an object control construction, the control verb is the abstract verb of the complement, and the complement subject controls PRO. When a verb like expect takes a PP complement, as in (3 lc), it is a control verb, but when it takes a small clause complement, as in (31d), it is not. The control verb in (31d), tra- ditionally an ECM construction, is the abstract verb that heads the complement. In (31e), the control verb is the abstract verb that heads the complement offor, and in (31f), the control verb is a lexical R-verb. When there is no control verb present, as is the case with simple PP to-infinitive subjects, the interpretation of PRO is arbitrary, as shown in (32a). (32) a. [To PRO leave early] would be nice b. [For [John, (abstract verb) to PROi leave early]] would be nice When the subject consists offor and its small clause complement, as in (32b), there is a control verb present and a lexical antecedent. PRO is controlled. The position of PRO and the presence of abstract verbs are crucial. If PRO did not occupy the proposed position, or if there were no abstract verb in E-verb and O-verb complements, then we would not have the parallel between complement and matrix structure necessary to reduce control to a single configuration. Having accomplished this reduction, however, we can consider PRO to be an anaphor and derive control from Principle A. In the sentences in (33), to is the gov- ernor of PRO. (33) a. [p John, tried to [u PRO, win]] b. John ordered [p Billi (abstract verb) to [Y PRO, leave]] C. *John, ordered [s Bill (abstract verb) to [Y PROi leave]] d. For [s Billi (abstract verb) to [,, PROi leave]] would be nice In (33a), the matrix clause p is the governing category of PRO. John, the subject of the matrix clause, is the antecedent. In (33b), p, the small clause complement of ordered, is PRO™s governing category. Bill, the small clause subject, is the antecedent. (33~) is the same sentence as (33b) except that PRO is indexed to John, the subject of the matrix clause. With this indexing, the sentence is ungrammatical because John is outside PRO™s governing category. In (33d), p, the small clause complement of for, is the governing category. Bill, the small clause subject, is the antecedent. B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 43 That PRO may be arbitrary in certain circumstances could be a problem, but lex- ical anaphors are arbitrary in similar circumstances (Ken Safir, personal communi- cation). I will not attempt to analyze this phenomenon, but only note it: ﬂ (34) a. To PRO win the race would be nice b. Pictures of oneself are pleasing. 6.2. Complex cases Lasnik (1992a) offers some interesting objections to the idea of reducing control to anaphoric binding. His first objection is based on the perception that anaphors and PRO behave differently on a very basic level. He argues that anaphors have some optionality in what they can take as their antecedent and that this optionality is lack- ing for PRO. For example, the anaphor in (35a) is bound by the subject, but the anaphor occupying the same position in (35b) is bound by the object. (35) a. Johni told Mary about himself, b. John told Mary, about herselfi C. Johni told Sam about himself, John told Sam, about himself, When the subject and object agree in gender as in (3.5~) it is ambiguous as to which binds the anaphor. Contrary to Lasnik™s claim, there are parallels to this phenomenon in control con- structions. The subject controls PRO in (36a), but the object controls PRO in the par- allel (36b). In (36c), either the subject or the object can control PRO. (36) a. Johni promised Mary to PRO, leave b. John promised Mary, to PRO, be allowed to leave C. Johni asked the teacher to PROi leave (but she wouldn™t let him) John asked the teacher, to PRO, leave (but she wouldn™t) Bouchard (1983) attributes this phenomenon to pragmatic effects. These are analo- gous to the gender agreement effects of the anaphors in (35) in that they may render the antecedent unambiguous. The structural configurations that allow these effects, however, must be examined. Given the definitions in (28) it is impossible for constructions like (35a) and (36a) to receive a small clause analysis, since the antecedents would be outside the gov- erning categories of the anaphor and PRO: (37) a. *Johni told [sc Mary about himselfi ] b. *Johni promised [sc Mary to PRO, leave ] I™ The proposed analysis does not exclude the possibility argued for in Bouchard (1983) that PRO is only an anaphor when controlled but that it is a pronoun when freely interpretable. 44 B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-S In the (37) examples, corresponding to (35a) and (36a), the small clause would be the governing category, but the antecedent is the subject of the matrix clause. My tentative solution is to say that these are actually instances of PP complements with the objects adjoined to the matrix verb in a ‚base reanalysis™ configuration, as illustrated in (38). (38) a. John [vr [v told Mary ] [pp about himself, ]] b. Johni [vp [v promised Mary ] [pp to PROi leave ]] There are several aspects to this approach that make it appealing. First, it maintains the single configuration for control that allows it to be reduced to anaphoric binding. Second, it maintains parallel structural analyses between object and to-infinitive con- structions. And third, since the case of the object can be checked in the adjunction configuration, there is no need to raise it to Spec Agro for case checking. This means that in (38) the antecedents are unambiguous, since the objects will never c-com- mand the anaphor or PRO. Sentences like (3%) and (36~) would be ambiguous between small clause and adjunction structures, potentially having the reading asso- ciated with either. This analysis also answers a second objection from Lasnik (1992a). This second objection is based on the fact that, in Polish, reflexives must be bound by subjects but PRO may be controlled by either subjects or objects. This is illustrated in (39), borrowed from Lasnik who cites Willim (1982). (39) a. Jani opowiadal Marii o SWOiIlli ojcu John telling Mary about self™s father ‚John was telling Mary about his father™ b. *Jan opowiadal Marii, o SWOimi ojcu John telling Mary about self™s father ‚John was telling Mary about her father™ C. Jan kazal Mat-ii, [PROi napisac artykui] John told Mary write article ‚John told Mary to write the article™ In a traditional account, with the subject control/object control dichotomy, object control configurations cannot meet the restriction of being bound by the subject. The proposed analysis, however, where all control is subject control and where anaphoric binding is a subject/element-of-the-complement relationship, easily overcomes this objection. One hypothesis that could account for the difference between English and Polish is that Polish abstract verbs, as with many English lexical verbs, for example, are incompatible with reflexivization. So (39a), which would have an adjunction structure similar to (38a) allows reflexivization, but (39b), which would receive a small clause analysis does not. B. Hyde I Linguu II0 (1999) 27-58 45 7. Complement selection A primary objective of complementation theory has been to determine when PRO may occur in the subject position of to-infinitive complements. For example, in the- ories where PRO is caseless and ungoverned (see Chomsky, 1981), one way to obtain the desired result is to select for IP or CP. When IP is selected, the comple- ment subject is governed, and PRO cannot occur. When CP is selected, if there is no complementizer such as for, the subject position is ungoverned and occupied by PRO. With the realization, however, that PRO has case and must be governed (see Chomsky and Lasnik, 1993; Baltin, 1995; Chomsky, 1995 and BoSkovic, 1996) another way to predict the appropriate distribution has to be found. The proposed account casts the problem in a different light. When PRO may occur with the to-infinitive is not the issue, since PRO will always occur as a result of to™s case properties. The question now is how do we get a simple PP to-infinitive with some verbs and additional small clause structure with others? It is not enough to say that a matrix verb selects either a VP or a PP complement, although in a lim- ited number of cases this would suffice. Verbs like help, for example, take either bare infinitive complements or small clause to-infinitive complements - both VPs - and verbs like long and love take either PP to-infinitive complements or for small clause complements - both PPs. Other verbs, however, are more restricted. Complementation must be a matter of selecting, not for a maximal projection or the category of a head, but for a specific head or class of head.‚? Verbs select a com- plement headed by a class of verb or preposition, or even a specific verb or preposi- tion. It is the properties of the selected head - its selectional restrictions, Q-assign- ment, and complementation - that determine the structure of the complement as a whole. For example, S-verbs and R-verbs are parallel in that they select a preposition to. giving them PP to-infinitive complements : (40) a. Agnes tried [rp to [vp PRO win the race]] b. Agnes seemed [rp to [vr PRO win the race]] Since PRO is always required as a result of to™s case properties, R and S-verb con- structions both have PRO-antecedent relationships. The absence of an abstract verb in S and R-verb complements means that they do not have the small clause structure necessary to have lexical NP subjects. E-verbs and O-verbs are parallel in that they select an abstract verb, giving them small clause complements: I2 This is where including Agrp or TP in the analysis would introduce some additional wrinkles. If a complement had to be Agrp or TP, rather than VP, then there would have to be some mechanism allow- ing the head of VP to determine whether or not selectional restrictions on the complement are met. This might be done by raising V to the head of the complement to check off some feature introduced in that position as a result of these selectional restrictions. 46 B. Hyde I Lingua I10 (1999) 27-58 (41) a. John expected [sc Bill (abstract verb) [rp to PRO leave early]] b. Sam persuaded [sc Bill (abstract verb) [rp to PRO leave early]] The small clause structure of E-verb and O-verb complements allows both to have lexical NP subjects, with PRO always occurring in the PP to-infinitive complement of the abstract verb. There is no absolute separation between verb classes with respect to the types of to-infinitive complements they may take. Expect, for example, takes both small clause and PP complements, meaning that expect may optionally select the preposi- tion to or an abstract verb. Another class of verbs also has optional complementation patterns, selecting either the preposition for or the preposition to: (42) a. Bill hoped for John to leave. b. Bill hoped to leave. c. John longed for Sam to be successful. d. John longed to be successful. e. Sam wanted for Bill to be happy. f. Sam wanted to be happy. When these verbs select a to complement, they exhibit the characteristics of S-verbs. Their complements do not have abstract verbs or lexical NP subjects. When they select for, for in turn takes a small clause complement with a lexical NP subject. Having reduced infinitive structure to a single type, the complementation of to has become parallel to that of perception verbs. The difference is that perception verbs have lexical complement subjects, because they assign accusative case, and to has a PRO complement subject, because it assigns null case. Like the elements previously discussed, to and verbs like see and hear select the heads of their complements. That these elements can take a wide range of verbs as their complement head suggests that they have very general selectional restrictions: (43) a. John saw Bill leave. b. John saw Bill hit Mary. c. John saw Fred throw the ball. d. John saw Mary kiss Bill. e. John tried to leave. f. John tried to hit Mary. g. John tried to throw the ball. h. John tried to kiss Mary. There are certain differences, however. To may select be, but see usually may not: (44) a. John tried to be happy. b. John tried to be successful. c. *John saw Bill be happy. d. *John saw Bill be successful. B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 41 As noted on several occasions, verbs like see and hear must take complements that are events (see Safir, 1993 and Higginbotham, 1983, and sources cited therein). They may not take complements that describe states. Given their broad selectional restrictions, these elements probably select classes or properties of verbs rather than specific verbs. This could also be true of elements that select abstract verbs, but the number of abstract verbs could be so small that selecting a class would mean selecting a single verb or perhaps two or three. 7.1. The difference between S-verbs and R-verbs Although S-verbs and R-verbs are parallel with respect to complementation and their PRO-antecedent relationships, the differing behavior of their subject positions must be explained. R-verbs may take expletives and idiom chunks, but S-verbs may not: (45) a. There seemed to be a problem. b. There appeared to be a problem. c. The shit seems to have hit the fan. d. *There tried to be a problem. e. *The shit tried to hit the fan. In the traditional account, expletives are allowed only in positions to which no @role is assigned. They may not occur as the subjects of subject control verbs, since these assign a &role to their subject position. Raising verbs do not assign @roles to their subject, so expletives may occupy this position, or an appropriate NP may move into it. The challenge for the proposed account is that a raising analysis, with its non- assignment of O-roles, is no longer available to R-verbs, as the subjects of R-verbs must originate in this position. The raising analysis, however, is called into question by the possible positions of ‚preverbs™. The preverb all cannot appear in the position indicated in (46), which would not be true if NP-trace also appeared in the position indicated. (46) *They, seemed 4 all happy This is given the analysis of Baltin (1995), who argues that preverbs like all may immediately precede predicates with appropriate subjects. If they had raised to the subject position of seemed leaving the indicated trace, then this trace would serve as a subject allowing all to precede happy. That this type of structure is ungrammatical is clear evidence that no raising has occurred. (I will discuss Baltin™s analysis and the positioning of preverbs in more detail in section 8.) If they did not raise into the subject position in (46), then it must have originated in this position. For this to occur, however, seem has to assign a Cl-role. The @role of R-verbs - which I will refer to as the null Cl-role - would be much more general than the specific e-role of S-verbs and would have selectional restrictions broad enough to allow either expletives and idiom chunks, as in (45a-c), or contentful NPs, as in (47). 48 B. Hyde / Lingua I10 (1999) 27-58 (47) a. They seemed happy. b. Bill appeared shaken. This account creates a three-way distinction for B-assignment similar to that of case. The three-way distinction consists of specific O-roles, the null B-role, and absence of &role. The chief functional difference between the null O-role and no Cl- role is that NPs may originate in positions with a null Cl-role, but they may not orig- inate in positions with no O-role. Little is lost with this account.‚ﬁ.‚4 Although a null &role allowing R-verbs to select almost anything has much the same effect as if they had no selectional restrictions at all, NPs in null O-positions are often indexed to a PRO element: (48) a. Johni seemed to PROi leave b. *The universe, seemed to PRO, leave This indexing insures that whatever selectional restrictions are placed on PRO must also be met by the NP with the null O-role. When this fails, the result is ungrammat- ical, as illustrated in (48b). Note that this account does not diminish the traditional distinction between PRO and NP-trace. PRO simply appears in certain R-verb constructions where NP-trace appeared in the traditional analysis. This results from the introduction of the null 8- role and does not necessitate any changes in the properties of either PRO or NP- trace. I still assume, for example, that NP-trace occurs in the object position of pas- sives and unaccusatives and in Spec VP when a subject moves to Spec IP. The difference between R-verbs and S-verbs, then, reduces to the generality of the selectional restrictions they place on, and the Q-roles they assign to, their subjects. It I3 Under the assumption that case is necessary for &marking visibility, there is the issue of why exple- tives must occur in a case position if they do not have @roles. Although persuasive accounts have been given in terms of expletives being a target for movement at LF (see Chomsky, 1986b; Lasnik, 1992b, and Chomsky and Lasnik, 1993), the proposed analysis would avoid the issue altogether by assigning expletives a null b-role. Agreement effects might occur through the indexing of the expletive to a lower phrase, but the expletive would no longer be a target for movement. (See Chomsky, 1995, for an alter- native account under Minimalist assumptions.) I4 There is also the well known issue concerning scopal ambiguities in raising constructions that are not possible in control constructions (See May, 1985 and Safir, 1985, for some discussion): (i) Some professor, tried PRO, to attend every lecture (ii) Some professor, seemed ti to attend every lecture (iii) Some professor, wanted PROi to attend every lecture In (i), every lecture can only have narrow scope. In (ii), every lecture may have either narrow scope or wide scope. The difference between (i) and (ii) has usually been accounted for in terms of raising vs. a PRO-antecedent relationship. Sentence (ii) is ambiguous because raising constructions have the possi- bility of lowering the matrix subject at LF. Although lowering at LF is not possible in the proposed analysis, since there is a PRO-antecedent relationship in R-verb constructions, it is clear that lowering does not really explain this phenomenon. This is evidenced by the scopal ambiguity of wan&type con- structions. In (iii), every lecture may have either narrow scope or wide scope. Since want constructions have PRO-antecedent relationships, this ambiguity cannot be explained by lowering. The possibility of lowering in raising constructions is, therefore, a non-argument against the proposed account. B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 49 is not a difference between raising and non-raising. As we shall see in section 7.2, the difference between E-verb to-infinitive complements and O-verb to-infinitive com- plements is exactly the difference between R-verb structures and S-verb structures. 7.2. E-verb and O-verb complements Both E-verbs and O-verbs take small clause complements, but like matrix R-verbs and S-verbs, E and O-verb complements differ with respect to taking expletive sub- jects. E-verb complements, as in (49a,b), parallel matrix R-verbs, as in (49~) in that both allow expletives: (49) a. John believed [there to be a problem] John believed [it to be raining] b. John expected [there to be a problem] John expected [it to rain] c. There seemed to be a problem. O-verb complements, as in (50a,b), parallel matrix S-verbs, as in (~OC), in that nei- ther allow expletives : (50) a. *John warned [there to be a problem] *John warned [it to rain] b. *John ordered [there to be a problem] *John ordered [it to rain] c. *There tried to be a problem. The difference between E-verb and O-verb complements can be explained in a fash- ion identical to matrix R-verb and S-verb structures, since the responsibility for 8- assignment to complement subjects shifts in this analysis from the matrix verb, as in traditional ECM and object control accounts, to the abstract verb. This shift is supported by the fact that expletives may not occur in all types of E- verb complements. When E-verbs take canonical small clause complements, no expletive is allowed. For example: John believed there to be a problem vs. *John believed there a problem (see Lasnik, 1992b, for some discussion). If the matrix verb was responsible for B-assignment to this position, then we would incorrectly predict uniformity in allowing or disallowing expletives. If the abstract verbs were responsi- ble for O-assignment to this position and if the abstract verb that heads the to-infini- tive complements has different properties than the abstract verb that heads the canonical small clause complements, then we could obtain the correct prediction. To obtain the correct distribution of expletives, the head of E-verb to-infinitive complements must be an R-verb and the head of O-verb to-infinitive complements must be an S-verb: (51) a. John believed [there (abstract R-verb) to be a problem] b. *John persuaded [there (abstract S-verb) to be a problem] 50 B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 Since R-verbs assign the null e-role and S-verbs assign specific O-roles, expletives can occur in the subject position of E-verb complements, as in (51a) but not in the subject position of O-verb complements, as in (51b). Also, the head of complements offor must be an R-verb since expletives may occur as the complement subject, as in Mary hoped for it to rain and Mary longed for it to rain. To summarize what has been established about complementation, complement structures can result from the complement selection of several elements. Lexical verbs, abstract verbs, and prepositions each select complements, often making com- plement construction a cooperative effort. The verbs under consideration either take small clause complements or prepositional phrase complements. This is summarized in Table 1. Table 1 Summary of Verb Complementation Verb type S-verb R-verb O-verb E-verb: believe-type expect-type Hope-type PP complement to for + + Small clause complement S-verb head R-verb head + + + + + + S-verbs, R-verbs, and hope-type verbs take only prepositional phrase complements. S- and R-verbs select the preposition to, but hope-type verbs may select either to or for. Of the two types that take small clause complements, O-verbs select S-verb complement heads, and E-verbs select R-verb complement heads. The abstract verb in these constructions allows them to have lexical NP complement subjects. Expect- type E-verbs also take PP to-infinitive complements. When this occurs they exhibit the general properties of S-verbs. Table 2 summarizes complement selection for prepositions. Table 2 Summary of preposition complementation Preposition Complement Infinitive Small clause (R-verb head) To For + + B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 51 8. Floating quantifier positions Independent evidence for the proposed analysis is based on the proposals of Baltin (1995) which examines the question of why floating quantifiers and other ‚preverbs™ may occur in some positions in to-infinitive complements but not in others: (52) a. They all tried/seemed to leave. b. Bill expected/ordered them all to leave. c. Bill expected/ordered them to all leave. d. They tried/seemed to all leave. e. *They tried/seemed all to leave. Example (52a) shows that all may follow the matrix subject. Examples (52b,c) show that all may precede or follow to when an NP follows the matrix verb, as in E-verb and O-verb constructions, and (52d,e) demonstrate that all may only follow to when no NP follows the matrix verb, as in S-verb and R-verb constructions.r5 First, 1 will outline Baltin™s theory and some problems that it encounters. Then I will show how overcoming these problems provides independent evidence for the proposed posi- tioning of PRO. Finally, I will use Baltin™s analysis to argue that to is a preposition rather than an Infl. 8.1. Baltin ‚s theory In Baltin™s (1995) account, preverbs must immediately precede a ‚predication phrase™. A phrase is considered predicational if it has a subject, and lexical NPs, NP- trace, and PRO may all serve as appropriate subjects. Example (53) shows an ECM- type complement where both the I™ of (53a) and the V™ of (53b) are predication phrases. Is Although it does not completely match Baltin™s judgments, I have grouped R-verbs in the same pat- tern with S-verbs, allowing a preverb after but not before to. Baltin assumes sentences like (i) to be grammatical, and, in his discussion, raising verb complements receive an analysis parallel to ECM com- plements. (Raising verb complements would have the type of structure shown in (53) with trace replac- ing the lexical NP, since the NP would have moved to the matrix subject position.) (i) They seemed all to be friendly to us. Although to some speakers these types of sentences seem slightly better than their S-verb counterparts, it is clear that they are not fully grammatical. Certainly, as mentioned in section 7.1, a sentence like (ii), which would have to receive much the same analysis under a raising approach, is ungrammatical. (ii) *They seemed all happy. 52 B. Hyde I Lingua 1 IO (1999) 27-58 (53) a. themi [all] A to L A 4 V™ I win b. IP themi t ti [all] V™ L----l ™ win In both examples, the NP them moves from Spec VP to Spec IP so that the matrix verb can assign it accusative case. In (53a), them is the IP subject, so all may imme- diately precede the to-infinitive. In (53b), NP-trace is the VP subject, so all may immediately precede win. Example (55) illustrates a subject control-type complement. The V™ of (55a) is predicational because it has a PRO subject, so all may immediately precede win. The I™ of (55b) does not have a subject, so all may not precede the to-infinitive. B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 (54) a. A to A PRO [all] V™ win b. *IP [all1 A to A PRO V™ win Baltin approaches the position of PRO in the (55) examples in a manner similar to that of the proposed analysis. Unlike the proposed analysis, Baltin has no PRO in ECM complements like the (53) examples, taking these to be instances of NP move- ment. It is ECM complements, however, and raising verb complements that pose case problems for Baltin. 8.2. Baltin ‚s problem In Baltin™s (1995) account, PRO and NP-trace overlap in distribution since PRO remains in situ in Spec VP and lexical NPs originate in and then move out of this position. PRO remains in situ because to assigns it null case. Lexical NPs, which move presumably to get nominative or accusative case, as in (53), are assigned case twice - null case in their original position and nominative or accusative in their final position. To circumvent this problem, Baltin proposes that the different types of case are needed for two different reasons. Null case is assigned to render an element visible for O-marking. This type of case, which Baltin refers to as [-actualized], is based on Aoun (1979). Nominative and accusative are [+actualized] cases that are meant to satisfy the case filter for lexical NPs. This type follows Vergnaud, discussed in Rou- veret and Vergnaud (1980). Presumably, [+actualized] case also fulfills the O-mark- ing function for lexical NPs. When a chain is assigned both types of case, it actually only has the necessary type. A structure would be ungrammatical only if a chain were assigned the same type twice. Baltin™s account incorrectly predicts, however, that the passive sentences in (55) are acceptable. 54 B. Hyde I Lingua I10 (1999) 27-58 (55) a. ﬁJOhni was tried to ti open the door b. ﬁJohni was decided to ti enter the race The NP movements in (55) form a doubly case marked chain with nominative [+actualized] case assigned at the highest position and null [-actualized] case assigned at the lowest. Since this type of chain is acceptable under Baltin™s theory, there is nothing to rule out these constructions. We can dispense with the overlapping distribution of PRO and NP-trace, as well as the problem of doubly case marked chains, by saying that PRO is actually the only element that can occur as to™s complement subject and that it never moves out of this position. This can be done by stipulating, as in (25), that to assigns null case across the VP boundary. The lexical NP subjects of (53), then, are actually subjects of small clauses. Since verbs and prepositions likefor assign structural case across small clause boundaries, lexical NPs occupy this position. The structures in (53), are modified in (56) to cor- respond to the proposed E-verb and 0-verbI complement configuration. (56) a. them, [all] A (abs. vrb.) A to A PROi V™ win b. A them, A (abs. vrb.) to A PROi [all] V™ win ﬂ The structure of object control constructions is not clear in Baltin™s proposal, although it is clear that he considers the object to be in a position that satisfies the subject requirement to make the to-infinitive a predicate. B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 5s In (56), as in (54), PRO occurs in the Spec of a VP complement of to, maintaining a complementary distribution between PRO and NP-trace. Since there is no overlap, there is no need to complicate the case theory. Also note that, to maintain this distri- bution, R-verb structures must be parallel to S-verb structures, as in (54), in that they do not form a trace chain, but must have a PRO antecedent relationship. 8.3. Evidence for the categorial status of to Another observation concerns Baltin™s (1995) analysis and the Extended Projec- tion Principle of Chomsky (1981). If to is an Infl, then allowing PRO to remain in situ as in (54a,b), the critical cases for Baltin, would be in violation of the EPP. Although Baltin uses a different EPP than that of Chomsky (1981)ﬂ and does not insist that to is an Infl, it will be enlightening to show that, given the core of Baltin™s structural analysis and Chomsky™s EPP, to cannot be an Infl. Under Chomsky™s EPP. it must be the case either that PRO actually does occur in the Spec IP position. undermining Baltin™s analysis of preverbs, or that to is actually not an Infl and no EPP violation occurs. The proposed account takes the latter option by maintaining that to is actually a preposition with a VP complement. Baltin™s structures, as shown in (54), would be modified to the structures in (57). These examples illustrate the complement structure of both S-verbs and R-verbs. (57) a. ,---v™.--\ tried A to ,__v_p_____ PRO [all] V™ win b. VP PRO win ﬂ Baltin uses the EPP of Rothstein (1983), which says that predicates must have subjects. Predication for Baltin has two parts. Some elements, such as verbs, are inherent predicates, and the EPP applies only to this type. Other elements, such as the to-infinitive may become predicates by virtue of being in a syn- tactic configuration in which they have an appropriate subject. These elements, however, do not obtain their subjects by means of the EPP. Other reasons, such as case, must provide movement of an appro- priate NP to the subject position of a derived predicate. 56 B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 In (57), PRO remains in situ with the preposition to assigning it null case. There is no IP and no Spec IP to be filled, so there is no EPP violation. The quantifier all can follow the preposition to in (57a) because it occurs with the VP subject, PRO. All cannot precede the preposition to, as in (57b), because it does not occur with a sub- ject. Thus, analyzing to as a preposition maintains the advantages of Baltin™s pro- posal without incurring problems with the EPP. That to is a preposition is further evidenced by a comparison with the properties offrom. Baltin points out that from behaves identically to to with respect to floating quantifiers : (58) a. Bill kept them all from leaving. b. Bill kept them from all leaving. C. They all refrained from leaving. d. They refrained from all leaving. e. *They refrained all from leaving. The analysis is essentially the same as above with from replacing to. Evidence that from is a preposition comes from the fact that it can take NP complements (Ken Safir, personal communication): (59) a. John prevented Bill from further persistence in his crude behavior. b. John refrained from participation in the hazing. Since to andfrom pattern together with respect to the positioning of preverbs, they are likely of the same category. Moreover, since there are significant problems with considering to to be an Infl and sincefrom can take NP complements, both are likely prepositions. l8 Thus we see that overcoming Baltin™s case problems constitutes inde- pendent evidence for the proposed position of PRO and that Baltin™s analysis, in conjunction with the EPP of Chomsky (1981), illustrates that to should be consid- ered a preposition rather than an Infl. 9. Conclusion This article has outlined an account of to-infinitive constructions and several advantages that follow from the approach pursued. The to-infinitive was reanalyzed as the preposition to with a bare infinitive complement, eliminating it as a separate infinitive class. Crucial to the analysis were the occurrence of abstract verbs in cer- tain to-infinitive constructions and the complementary distribution of PRO and lexi- cal NPs. The analysis was motivated by interpretational considerations of want, expect, and help-type constructions and was shown to have several advantages. First, the complementary distribution of PRO and lexical NPs allows a consistent theory of ‚s Note that to does not take NP complements in these types of constructions so the parallel with from is not absolute. B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 57 null case. Second, Object Control and Subject Control reduce to a single phenome- non with control being an anaphoric bindi™ng relation between the control verb™s sub- ject and a PRO element contained in the control verb™s complement. Third, the approach allows a highly general, uniform theory of complement selection, where complementation is based on selecting the complement head. Independent evidence for the proposal was based on Baltin (1995). References Abney, S.. 1987. The English noun phrase in its sentential aspect. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Aoun, J., 1979. On government, Case-marking, and clitic placement. Ms., MIT, Cambridge, MA. Aoun, J., and Y.H.A. Li., 1989. Scope and constituency. Linguistic Inquiry 20, 141-172. Baker, M., 1988. Incorporation: A theory of grammatical function changing. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Baltin, M., 1995. Floating quantifiers, PRO, and predication. Linguistic Inquiry 26, 199-248. Borer, H., 1989. Anaphoric AGR. In: 0. Jaeggli and K.J. Safir (eds.), The null subject parameter, 69-109. Dordrecht: Kluwer. BoSkoviC, i., 1996. Selection and the categorical status of infinitival complements. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 14, 269-304. Bouchard, D., 1983. On the content of empty categories. Dordrecht: Foris. Bowers, J., 1993. The syntax of predication. Linguistic Inquiry 14, 591656. Bresnan, 1972? Chomsky, N., 1981. Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris. Chomsky, N., 1986a. Barriers. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1986b. Knowledge of language. New York: Praeger. Chomsky, N., 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., and H. Lasnik., 1993. The theory of principles and parameters. In: J. Jacobs, A. von Ste- chow, W. Stemefeld and T. Vennemann (eds.), Syntax: an international handbook of contemporary research, 506569. Berlin: De Gruyter. Collins, C., and H. Thrainsson, 1996. VP-internal structure and object shift in Icelandic. Linguistic Inquiry 27, 391-444. den D&ken, M., 1995. Particles: On the syntax of verb-particle, triadic, and causative constructions. New York: Oxford University Press. Freeze, R., 1992. Existentials and other locatives. Language 68, 553-595. Green, G.M., 1974. Semantics and syntactic regularity. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. Grimshaw, J., 1979. Complement selection and the lexicon. Linguistic Inquiry 10, 279-326. Henry, A., 1992. Infinitives in a for-to dialect. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory IO, 279-301. Higginbotham, J., 1983. The logic of perceptual reports: An existential alternative to situation semantics Journal of Philosophy 80, 100-127. Higginbotham, J., 1992. Anaphoric reference and common reference. Ms., Oxford University. Hoekstra, T., 1978. De status en plaats van het indirekt object. In: J. Kooij (ed.), Aspekten van woord- volgorde in het Nederlands, 4&69. Leiden: Vakgroep Nederlandse Taal- & Letterkunde. Hoekstra, T., 1988. Small clause results. Lingua 74, 101-139. Hoekstra, T., 1995. To have to be dative. In: H. Haider, S. Olsen and S. Vikner (eds.), Studies in com- parative germanic syntax, 119-137. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Homstein, N., and D. Lightfoot, 1987. Predication and PRO. Language 63, 23-52. Jackendoff, R., 1990. On Larson™s account of the double object construction. Linguistic Inquiry 21, 427-454. Johnson, K., 1991. Object positions. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 9, 577-636. Kayne, R.S., 1981. Unambiguous paths. In: R. May and J. Koster (eds.), Levels of syntactic representa- tion, 143-183. Dordrecht: Foris. 58 B. Hyde I Lingua 110 (1999) 27-58 Kayne, R.S., 1984. Connectedness and binary branching. Dordrecht: Foris. Kayne, R.S., 1993. Toward a modular theory of auxiliary selection. Studia Linguistica 47, 3-31. Kayne, R.S., 1995. The antisymmetry of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Larson, R.K., 1988. On the double object construction. Linguistic Inquiry 19, 335-391. Larson, R.K., 1990. Double objects revisited: Reply to Jackendoff. Linguistic Inquiry 21, 589-632. Lasnik, H., 1992a. Two notes on control and binding. In: R.K. Larson, S. Iatridou, U. Lahiri and J. Hig- ginbotham (eds.), Control and grammar, 235-252. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Lasnik, H., 1992b. Case and expletives. Linguistic Inquiry 23, 381-405. Lasnik, H., and M. Saito, 1991. On the subject of Infinitives. CLS 27, 324-343. Manzini, R., 1983. On control and control theory. Linguistic Inquiry 14, 421446. Martin, R., 1992. On the distribution and case features of PRO. Ms., University of Connecticut. May, R., 1985. Logical Form. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Mohanan, K.P., 1985. Remarks on control and control theory. Linguistic Inquiry 16, 637-648. Pesetsky, D., 1995. Zero syntax: Experiencers and cascades. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Pinker, S., 1989. Learnability and cognition: the acquisition of argument structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Pollock, J.-Y., 1985. On case and the syntax of infinitives in French. In: J. Gueron, H. Obenhauer and J.-Y. Pollock (eds.), Grammatical representation, 293-326. Dordrecht: Foris. Rothstein, S., 1983. The syntactic forms of predication. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Rouveret, A. and J.-R. Vergnaud, 1980. Specifying reference to the subject: French causatives and con- ditions on representations. Linguistic Inquiry 11, 97-202. Safir, K., 1985. Syntactic chains. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Safir, K., 1993. Perception, selection, and structural economy. Natural Language Semantics 2, 47-70. Stowell, T., 1981. Origins of phrase structure. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Stowell, T., 1982. The tense of infinitives. Linguistic Inquiry 13, 561-570. Stowell, T., 1983. Subjects across categories. The Linguistic Review 2, 285-312. Watanabe, A., 1993. AGR-based theory and its interaction with the A-bar system. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Williams, E., 1975. Small clauses in English. In: J. Kimball (ed.), Syntax and semantics 4, 249-273. New York: Academic Press. Williams, E., 1980. Predication. Linguistic Inquiry 11, 203-238. Williams, E., 1983. Against small clauses. Linguistic Inquiry 14, 287-308. Willim, E., 1982. Anaphor binding and pronominal disjoint reference in English and Polish. Masters Thesis, University of Connecticut. 