ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001) 759-769 www.elsevier.com/locate/lingua Book review Anne-Marie Brousseau, Rkalisations argumentales et classes de verbes en fxzgb& Selaf no 365. Paris, Peeters, , 196 pp. Reviewed by Enoch Olade Aboh, ACLC/University of Amsterdam and Depart- ment of Linguistics, University of Geneva, 2 rue de Candolle, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. E-Mail: Enoch.Aboh@lettres.unige.ch This book discusses verb classes in Fongbe, a Kwa language of the Gbe group, in the lexical semantics framework developed in the MIT Lexicon Project and applied to English verbs in Levin (1993). Under this approach the meaning of a verb deter- mines its morpho-syntactic properties (Fillmore, 1967, 1968, Guerssel et al., 1985; Hale and Keyser, 1986, 1987; Laughren, 1988; etc.). The author proposes a classifi- cation of the Fongbe counterparts of French/English verbs such as break, cut, hit, slice, grind, pound, etc., and shows that various syntactic (and morphological) prop- erties of the Fongbe verb classes (e.g. causative/inchoative alternations, middle alternations, instrument alternations) derive from their meaning. The introduction and the first chapter introduce theoretical issues that are discussed in detail in the fol- lowing chapters. Chapter 2 discusses causative/inchoative alternation, Chapter 3 deals with instrument alternation and chapter 4 analyses instances of argument alter- nations. The book is well written and structured. As to content, the discussion of French data in terms of the lexical semantic theory leads the author to argue for a formal statement of language whereby lexical semantic representations of verbs reflect their semantic and syntactic properties. Under a comparative view, the analysis proposed for French (and also English) therefore extends to the Fongbe verb classes. However, there is a problem as to whether the Fongbe data really support the theory developed in the book. My opin- ion is that this is not the case. This is because close scrutiny of the data reveals that most of the examples relevant for the discussion are ungrammatical. Conversely, other examples which are perfectly grammatical are analysed by the author to be ungrammatical. Finally certain literal translations of French examples are consid- ered fully acceptable in Fongbe even though no Fongbe speaker (or none that I know of) would ever utter them. I discuss some of these facts in the following paragraphs. A crucial point for the theory developed in the book is that Fongbe displays two passive forms: verbal passive and adjectival passive. According to the author, 037%2166/01/$ - see front matter 0 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00048-6 760 Book review /Lingua 111 (2001) 759-769 sentence (la), which turns out to be ungrammatical, represents verbal passive while sentence (lb) illustrates adjectival passive. ™ (1) a. *Av?J 5 nyi wiw6lh pagne DCt Ctre RE-froisser ‚Le pagne a Cte froisse [the cloth has been wrinkled]™ b. %Av> 5 & wiw6ljn pagne DCt etre-8 RE-froisser ‚Le pagne est froisse [the cloth is wrinkled]™ [P. 181 However, as shown by the diacritics, sentence (la) is ungrammatical suggesting that verbal passives do not exist in Fongbe (at least not in the way they are described in the book). In a similar vein, sentence (lb) is not that productive in Fongbe and the judge- ments vary from marginal to ungrammatical. In most cases, Fongbe speakers would choose the sentences in (2) to express the intended meaning, where the verb wljn is unaccusative (2a). The sequence (2b) on the other hand involves the reduplicated verb, a type of ‚past participle™ functioning as an adjective. This would mean that on the surface level, situations that might involve adjectival passive are those of the type (2b) but not (lb). These facts suggest that the grammar of Fongbe (and probably Gbe) excludes structure (la): [subject/theme] > nyi > [reduplicated verb]. In addition struc- ture (lb): [subject/theme] > &? > [reduplicated verb] appears highly constrained.2 (2) a. b. Avj 5 wljn cloth Det wrinkle ‚The cloth is wrinkled™ Avj wiwljn cloth RED-wrinkle ‚(A) wrinkled cloth™ Alternatively, one can argue that the variations in acceptability that arise in (1) and (2) derive from some language or dialectal variation. If that were the case, then we should expect the same variations in other languages of the Gbe group. Even though they vary in many respects, the Gbe languages share phonological, syntactic, mor- phological and semantic properties that indicate their common origin (Ansre, 1966a, b; Clements, 1972; Bole-Richard, 1983; Capo, 1988; Ameka, 1991; etc.). Witness that the following Fongbe causative/inchoative verbs under Brousseau involve the same root as their Gungbe, Gengbe and Ewegbe counterparts even though there may be changes in tones or vowel nasalisation. ™ I keep the French gloss and translation as they appear in the book. The English interpretations in brackets and the examples glossed in English are mine. When necessary, I propose literal or word to word translations in order to provide the reader with a better interpretation of the Gbe sentences. ? It is interesting to observe that these facts also hold in Gungbe, Gengbe and Ewegbe. All my infor- mants found sentences of the type (la) very bad, while considering type (lb) very marginal if not ungrammatical. Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 759-769 761 (3) French/English Fongbe Gungbe Gengbe Ewegbe casser/hreak gbh gbd: gbdn gb& enterrer/hury 4i 4i cli 4i eteindre/put out [e.g. the fire]ﬂ ci ci ci tsi delier/untie tfn tlin ta tLi ouvrir/open hlin h&z hdn Vii moudre/grind Z-2 Zl ZP dz2lfk Building on such similarities, the minimal hypothesis is that the properties of the Fongbe passive constructions that the book discusses should also be found in other Gbe languages. Yet as shown by the ungrammatical sentences (4) none of the fol- lowing Gbe languages allows for the equivalents of the Fongbe passive constructions described in (1). (4) a. *Av3 13 nyi wiwld *AvM nye™ gjrjl5 *Av3-6 nyi t&715 cloth Det be RED-wrinkle ‚The cloth is wrinkled™ b. ? ?Avj lS td wiwld ??A& d le ~~t~l~ ? ?l*Avj d 12 g3rja cloth Det be RED-wrinkle ‚The cloth is wrinkled™ Gungbe Ewegbe 
Gengbe Gungbe Ewegbe Gengbe Here again the (a)-types are totally excluded while the (b)-types are considered very marginal or limited to certain well defined contexts. Under certain circumstances, Gungbe speakers may accept (5a), the unmarked form being that in (5a™). However, that all my informants systematically exclude (5b) on a par with (5d-c) suggests that there are strong semantic and pragmatic constraints on the Gungbe verbs that allow for the [subject/theme] > L@ > [reduplicated verb] constructions as well as the derivation of the so-called verbal adjectives. (5) a. mi&gb& 15 t6 cici lamp Det is RE-put out ‚The lamp is in an extinguished state™ Gungbe Notice that in Gbe, the word ci (like its French counterpart kteindre) is used to express both the meanings ‚to put out a fire™ and ‚to turn off™ a lamp. (i) a. yt! ci mi3 15 3pl put-out fire Det ‚They put out the fire™ b. ye™ ci mi5gbci 15 3pl put-out lamp Det ‚They turned off the lamp™ 162 Book review / Lingua 111 (2001) 759-769 a™. rnihgbd 13 ci lamp Det put-out ‚The lamp went out™ ‚The lamp was turned off (3 b. *mijn 15 td cid fire Det is RE-put out ‚The fire is put out™ C. *ci3 I3 tf3 @c@ body Det is RE-bury ‚The body is buried™ d. ﬁdgbhn l5 td gbigbd plate Det is RE-break ‚The plate is broken™ This suggests Gbe excludes passive constructions such as those in (la) above. On the other hand, it is not clear whether sentences like those in (lb) involve verbal passive constructions. If this is the right characterisation, then we can reasonably ask to what extent the Fongbe data presented in the book are relevant for the theory being devel- oped. The same holds true of certain grammatical examples which the author considers ungrammatical. A case in point is sentence (6a) which the author claimed to be ungrammatical to show that, like state verbs, adjectival passive does not allow for progressive aspect. Conversely, the ungrammatical sentence (6b) is considered grammatical to indicate that verbal passive allows for progressive aspect. (6) a. Asib6 c@ fldns~gbd s2 W2 Asiba Frog frangais comprendre Emp ‚Asiba est en train de comprendre le franqais™ [Asiba is making progress in the process of speaking/understanding/learning French] b. *Tdki 3 46 kpikpd nyi w2 piment DCt Prog RE-Cplucher Ctre Emp ‚Le piment est en train d™etre Cpluche (par quelqu™un)™ [the pepper is being peeled] [P. 551 In a similar vein, the ungrammatical sentences (7a-b), are considered grammatical as evidence that verbal passives and constructions that allow for middle alternation involve an implicit Agent whose presence is determined by the manner adverb.ﬂ ™ This sentence (also example (5d)) is acceptable with a progressive meaning, e.g. ‚the fire is dying out™. 5 Here again, I observed the same judgements in Gungbe, Gengbe, Ewegbe and some of their dialects. Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 759-769 163 (7) a. *Kprikpci 5 nyi (zi&i kp6 wd@dii kp6 canard Det 6%re RE-cuire avec danse avec ‚Le canard a CtC cuit en dansant [the duck has been cooked , while [the agent(s)) was/were] dancing] [p. 551 b. *Ndki 5 n3 td gcinji kpb hdnjiji kp6 bois DCt Hab empiler bien avec chanson avec ‚Le bois s™empile bien en chantant [i.e. firewood gets stacked easily, when [the agent(s)) is/are] singing] [p. 591 The book contains a significant number of such passive related constructions as well as other empirical data that are problematic. In addition, there are also certain con- ceptual inadequacies. The following paragraphs discuss such problems. In her analysis of the Fongbe passive morpheme, the author proposes that the reduplicated verb prefix RE has two properties: 1. In passive constructions RE absorbs both theta-role and case from the verb. 2. RE has nominal properties: it is specified for the feature [+N] (cf. Chapter 4). According to the author, that RE absorbs both theta-role and case in passive con- structions can be shown by looking at the Fongbe verbs gb6 ‚bark™ and k6 ‚laugh™. Brousseau suggests that these two verbs belong to the Fongbe class of intransitive verbs but can optionally license a direct object: an indication that they can assign case to their internal argument. She presents the data in (8) and (9) to support her argument. But I show in the following paragraphs that this is not the right character- isation. (8) a. Avid 5 gb6 (djdtj 5) chien Det aboyer voleur Det ‚Le chien a aboye (apres le voleur)™ [the dog barked at the thiefl b.Vi 5 kc? (/isibd) enfant Det rire Asiba ‚L™enfant a ri (d™Asiba)™ [the child laughed at Asiba] [P. 1431 In her account for example (8), the author argues that there is strong evidence that RE is a theta-role and case absorber because both gbb and k6 allow for impersonal passive constructions where they surface in the reduplicated form but exclude their internal argument. (9) a. E nyi gbigb6 (*cijM 5) il etre RE-aboyer voleur Det ‚11 a et6 aboye (*aprbs le voleur)™ [it has been barked at the thiefl b. E nyi kik6 (*/isibLi) il etre RE-rire Asiba ‚11 a CtC ri (*d™Asiba)™ [it has been laughed at Asiba] [P. 1441 764 Book review / Lingua 11 I (2001) 759-769 First, even though the description in (8a) is true for gbd, things are not so clear cut for kc5 (8b), which none of my Gbe informants accept when the object is dropped. Actually the generalisation seems to be that M can take a null object, but only when the latter is immediately available or recoverable from the discourse or context, as shown in (lOa), (Rizzi, 1986). Alternatively, the pleonastic object nti ‚thing™ is inserted as indicated by sentence (lob). Observe from the interpretations given in (lob) that the sentence is ambiguous as to whether Asiba laughed because the cloth is somehow funny or because the cloth reminded her of a situation that made her laugh. There is no such ambiguity in (1 Oa) where the empty category to the right of k6 ‚laugh™ is necessarily interpreted as dv3 3 ‚cloth the™. (10) a. Asibd kp5n civ3 5 b6 kd - kcikci Asiba look-Perf cloth Det and laugh-Perf for a while ‚Asiba looked at the cloth and then laughed [at it] for a while™ b. Asibci kph dv3 3 b6 kc5 nil kcikd Asiba look-Perf cloth Det and laugh-pet-f thing for a while ‚Asiba looked at the cloth and then laughed [at it] for a while™ ‚Asiba looked at the cloth and then laughed for a while™ In addition, the sentences in (11) indicate that, in sequences where the verb kcj ‚laugh™ is followed by the pleonastic bare NP nuﬂ ‚thing™, the complex M-nii is inter- preted as one verb ‚to laugh™. This behaviour is typical of inherent verb complements as discussed in Avolonto (1993, Essegbey (1999) among others. (11) a. Vi ~5 k6 nu™ child Det laugh-Perf thing ‚The child laughed™ *‚The child laughed at something™ b. Vi 5 k6 nii b&@b&Q & child Det 1aughPerf thing strange Dettinderinitet ‚The child laughed a strange laugh™ Notice, however, from the sentence in (12a) that even though gb6 can optionally select for an internal argument, it cannot license the pleonastic bare object nii. This is not the case in (12b) where the verb gbb optionally selects and case-assigns a DP headed by the indefinite determiner L@ which takes the NP nuﬂ as complement. (12) a. Avli 3 gbd (*nii) dog Det bark-Perf thing ‚The dog barked™ b. Avli 5 gbb (mi bd&b&@ c@)~ dog Det bark-pet-f thing strange Dettindesnitel ‚The dog barked at something strange™ h Interestingly, (12b) would be ungrammatical in Ewegbe because, the verb wo, the counterpart of the Gungbe gb6 ‚bark™, seems to select for PPs only (Essegbey, p.c.) Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 759-769 765 The data in (lo)-(12) strongly suggest that, in Fongbe, gbb ‚bark™ and M ‚laugh™ belong to two different classes. K6 shares the properties of both transitive verbs and inherent complement verbs, while gb6 appears to be an intransitive verb that may optionally license an internal complement. Second, in example (9), the analysis that the reduplicated forms gbigbd and kik8 necessarily exclude the internal arguments as a result of RE absorbing the theta-role and case from the verb is not tenable. Not only is it true that those verbs cannot occur in constructions like those in (9) but they simply don™t allow for Subject-nyi- RE-verb constructions. Put differently, those verbs cannot occur in the so-called ver- bal passive constructions.7 Witness the ungrammatical sentences in (13) where the internal arguments are not realised. Notice further that if we were to assume that Subject-nyi-RE-verb constructions exist in Gbe and therefore follow Brousseau™s analysis of RE, the sentences in (13) should be grammatical. (13) a. *E nyi gbigbd il Ctre RE-aboyer ‚11 a CtC aboye™ [it has been barked] b. *E nyi kik6 il Ctre RE-rire ‚11 a CtC ri™ [it has been laughed] That k6 is not an intransitive verb in Fongbe could explain the ungrammatical (13b). However the ungrammatical sentence (13a) forces the conclusion that the prefix RE cannot be considered a theta-role or case absorber. Going back to property 2 of RE, it is commonly assumed that reduplicated verbs in Kwa have a nominal feature (cf. Clements, 1972; Awoyale, 1974; Awobiiluyi, 1979; Fabb, 1992; AwoyalC, 1997; Manfredi, 1997; etc). That reduplicated verbs occur in various sequences involving nominal features supports this analysis. The Gungbe NP-RE-V sequence in (14a) is a noun. Sentence (14b) involves a redupli- cated verb functioning as an adjective. Sentence (14~) manifests the so-called V-O- RE-V structure, while the contrast in (14d-e) shows that, in progressive construc- tions, the lexical verb must reduplicate whenever there is no element to insert between the progressive auxiliary (or marker) and the lexical verb. (14) a. nz&&@ thing-RE-eat ‚Food™ b. gbddd mimCn maize RE-roast ‚Roasted maize™ Gungbe ™ According to my English informants this also holds true of the English verbs ‚to bark™ and ‚to laugh™. Witness, for instance, the literal translations for examples (9) and (13). 766 Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 759-769 c. thibh kpljn [dv?J tit31 Asiba learn-Perf cloth RE-sew ‚Asiba learned sewing™ d. Asibd t& dv5 13 t3 Asiba is cloth Det sew-NR8 ‚Asiba is sewing the cloth™ e. hv5 13 wd Asibci td tit3 cloth Det Foe Asiba is RE-sew-NR ‚It is the cloth that Asiba is sewing™ Granting that progressive constructions involve a process of nominalisation, the author proposes that in Fongbe, RE could qualify as the head of an aspect projection that triggers the feature [+N] on the verb as a result of V-to-Asp movement. Put dif- ferently, the prefix RE is responsible for nominalisation in the Fongbe progressive. But as shown in (14d-e) and correctly discussed by the author, RE can only appear in such Gbe constructions when there is no overt material to insert between the pro- gressive auxiliary and the lexical verb. In Gungbe this situation typically arises when the object is a clause (CP-object) or a clitic object (CL-object), when the object is wh-extracted or else when the verb is intransitive. This situation is schematised in (15) (cf. Fabb, 1992; Kinyalolo, 1992; Aboh, 1996, 1998; etc.). (15) a. Subject AUX VV-CP,,,,,,, b. Subject AUX VV-CL,,,j,,t, C. XP, Subject AUX VV ti d. Subiect Aux VVlintransitivel If true that RE triggers nominalisation in the progressive constructions, then one wonders why it is sensitive to both the linear order and the verb argument structure. The question becomes even more difficult when we look at the types of elements that can block verb reduplication in progressive constructions. The situation in (16) based on Gungbe™ progressive constructions shows that any overt material that intervenes between the progressive auxiliary and the lexical verb systematically blocks reduplication. Observe from the variety of the interveners that this position is not related to case assignment. 8 NR stands for nominaliser (cf. Aboh, 1996, 1998). ﬂ Gungbe and Fongbe are very similar with respect to verb reduplication within the progressive, except that Gungbe doesn™t allow for the negation marker to occur to the right of the progressive auxiliary as suggested by the Fongbe data discussed in the book (example 73b, p. 162). (i) a. K>kti &3 mci yi WC Koku Prog Neg go Emp ‚Koku is not leaving™ Fongbe [Brousseau, p. 1621 b. *K3kti tG md yi‚ Koku Prog Neg go-NR ‚Koku is not leaving™ Gungbe [Aboh, 1996, 19981 Observe, however, that none of my Fongbe informants accepts (73b). Similarly, my Ewegbe and Gengbe informants reject such constructions. (16) a. Subject Aux b. Subject Aux c. Subject Aux d. Subject Aux e. Subject Aux Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 759-769 767 DP[ot+ct] (ﬁVI v DP[relative clause] (*VI v [OVV] ‚0 (ﬁV) v \ nﬂ[Prospective aspect] (*V V[intransitive] Reduplicated-Adv (ﬁV) V,intransitivel For Brousseau, the sequences in (16) involve a truncated reduplicated verb where RE is blocked due to some phonological process. The argument there is that the blocking lexical item falls in the tone domain of the verb. But this cannot be true since examples in (14b, c) clearly show that the preceding element doesn™t always consist of a single lexical item. In a similar vein, one wonders what allows for sequences like (14a, c) where the object immediately precedes the reduplicated verb. Put differently, why is it that the phonological process which is at work in structures (16) is blocked in (14a,c)? An alternative account for the sequences under (14)-(16) is that verb reduplication is syntactically conditioned. The prospective aspect marker (14d) and the reduplicated verb compete for the same head position. They license a specifier position immediately to the left, when there is no maximal projection that can be moved to fill that specifier position. This would mean that nominalisation in the Gbe progressive constructions is not due to the prefix RE. Instead, it has been proposed that it is the manifestation of the sentence-final morpheme ~2, a left peripheral marker on a par with determiners, postnominal morphemes, sentence-final determiners, etc. (Aboh, 1998). Building on the idea that constructions involving middle alternation are similar to passive constructions in Fongbe, the author further concludes that the contrast in (17) and (18) can be reduced to that in (19). In other words, that verbal passive and adjectival passive involve a reduplicated verb as opposed to middle alternation con- structions can be explained by assuming that aspectual elements like nd, & block verb reduplication‚ This would mean that both structures (18) and (19b) involve a truncated reduplicated verb. This is not the case in (17) where there is no interven- ing element that could lead to RE-truncation. (17) a. b. (18) (19) a. *Av3 5 nyi wiwdjn pagne DCt etre RED-froisser ‚Le pagne a CtC froisst [the cloth has been wrinkled]™ Avj 3 @ wiwdkh pagne DCt etre-a RED-froisser ‚Le pagne est froisse [the cloth is wrinkled]™ Ldnpd e™lj nj ci gdnji lampe Dem Hab Cteindre bien ‚Cette lampe s™eteint facilement™ [this lamp is easy to turn offl Av3 5 ~$3 vlivli WE [P. 181 [P. 581 cloth Det Aux RE-tear Emp ‚The cloth is tearing™ _ ‚ﬂ That is the bracketed sequence in (14~). 768 Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 759-769 b. Av3 5 & nQ (ﬁVLi) vzi wE cloth Det Aux Prosp tear Emp ‚The cloth is about to tear™ This analysis suggests that the prospective marker nd and the habitual marker n3 tar- get the same position in the structure. Recall that, in this framework, truncation results from a phonological process that could be because the immediately preceding lexical item falls in the tone domain of the verb (Brousseau, p. 162). However sen- tences under (20a,b) clearly show that the habitual marker precedes the progressive auxiliary while the prospective marker follows it. In addition (20~) indicates that the Fongbe aspectual markers can be combined in the order habitual-progressive- prospective. The conclusion here is straightforward, nd and n3 do not manifest the same position and they cannot be source of the same phonological process. (20) a. As&& n3 &S yiyi WE Asiba Hab Aux RE-leave Emp ‚Asiba is habitually leaving [whenever we get there]™ b. i&b6 46 di yi WE Asiba Aux Prosp leave Emp ‚Asiba is about to leave™ c. . . . Asib n3 @ nd fh wE Asiba Hab Aux Prosp go-out Emp ‚[Anytime you see her], Asiba is about to go out [e.g. for shopping]™ The book also contains other conceptual inadequacies with respect to the inflectional system, predicate clefting and serial verb constructions in Gbe which I cannot dis- cuss here for reasons of space. This book opens the debate on the semantics and syn- tax of the Gbe languages. But there is still a lot to do to reach a precise and detailed description of the semantico-syntactic phenomena typical of these languages, the analysis that such facts suggest and the generalisations that they might lead to in regard to linguistic research. References Aboh, O.E., 1996. A propos de la syntaxe du Gungbe. Rivista di Grammatica Generativa 21: 3-56. Aboh, O.E., 1998. From the syntax of Gungbe to the grammar of Gbe. Sierre, Suisse: Editions a la Carte. Ameka, F., 1991. Ewe: Its grammatical and illocutionary devices. Ph.D. dissertation, ANU, Canberra. Ansre, G., 1966a. The verbid - a caveat to serial verbs. The Journal of West African Languages 1 29-32. Ansre, G., 1966b. The grammatical units of Ewe: A study of their structure clauses and systems. Ph.D. dissertation, University of London. Avolonto, A., 1995. Pour une approche minimaliste des verbes a objets inherents en Fongbe. Ph.D. dis- sertation, UQAM. Awobtilhyi, O., 1979. Essentials of Yoruba grammar. Ibadan: Oxford University Press. Awoyale, Y., 1974. Studies in the syntax and semantics of Yoruba nominalisations. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 759-769 769 Aw6ya16, Yiwola, 1997. Object positions in Yoruba. In: R.-M. Dechaine and V. Manfredi (eds.), Object position in Benue-Kwa, 7-30. The Hague: HILlHolland Academic Graphics. Bole-Richard, R., 1983. Systematique phonologique et grammatical d™un parler Ewe: Le Gen-Mina du Sud-Togo et Sud-Benin. Paris: Editions l™tlarmattan. Capo, H.B.C., 1988. Renaissance du Gbe: Reflexions critiques et constructives sur l™Eve, le Fon, le Gen, l™Aja, le Gun etc. Hamburg: Buske. Clements, G.N., 1972. The verbal syntax of Ewe, Ph.D. dissertation, University of London. Essegbey, J., 1999. Inherent complement verbs revisited: Towards an understanding of argument struc- ture in Ewe. Ph.D. dissertation, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen. Fabb, N., 1992. Reduplication and object movement in Ewe and Fon. Journal of African Languages and Linguistics 13 : l-39. Fillmore, C.J., 1967. The grammar of hitting and breaking. In: R. Jacobs and P. Rosenbaum (eds.), Readings in English transformational grammar, 120-133. Waltham, MA: Ginn. Filmore, C.J., 1968. The case for Case. In: E. Bach and R. Harms (eds.), Universals in linguistic theory, 1-91. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1-91. Guerssel, M., K. Hale, M. Laughren, B. Levin and J. White Eagle, 1985. A cross-linguistic study of tran sitivity alternations: Papers from the parasession on causatives and agentivity, CLS 21, Part 2, 48-63. Chicago, IL: CLS. Hale, K.L. and S.J. Keyser, 1986. Some transitivity alternations in English. Lexicon Project Working Papers 7. Cambridge, MA: Center for Cognitive Science, MIT. Hale, K.L. and S.J. Keyser, 1987. A view from the middle. Lexicon Project Working Papers 10. Cam- bridge, MA: Center for Cognitive Science, MIT. Kinyalolo, K.K.W., 1992. A note on word order in the progressive and prospective in Fon. The Journal of West African Languages 22,35-5 1. Laughren, M., 1988. Towards a lexical representation of Warlpiri verbs. In: W. Wilkins (ed.), Syntax and semantics 21: Thematic relations, 215-242. New York: Academic Press. Levin, B., 1993. English verb classes and alternations: A preliminary investigation. Chicago, IL: Uni- versity of Chicago Press. Manfredi, V., 1997. Aspectual licensing and object shift. In: R.-M. Dechaine and V. Manfredi (eds.), Object position in Benue-Kwa. The Hague: HIL/ Holland Academic Graphics. Rizzi, L., 1986. Null objects in Italian and the theory of pro. Linguistic Inquiry 17, 501-557. 