ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 www.elsevier.com/locate/hngua Compounding and inflection in language impairment : Evidence from Williams Syndrome (and SLI)* Harald Clahsen* and Mayella Almazan Department of Linguistics, University of Essex, Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK Received 17 May 2000; revised version 26 October 2000 Abstract We have examined potential dissociations between lexical and grammatical knowledge in language impairment by investigating noun plurals and plural formation inside compounds in Williams Syndrome (WS) subjects. For comparison, we also report results from studies inves- tigating the same linguistic phenomena in children with Specific Language Impairment (SLI). We found that nouns taking regular plurals were always correctly inflected by the WS sub- jects, whereas they performed much worse on nouns that take irregular plurals. The WS sub- jects heavily overregularized the regular -s plural, and they even used the plural -s as non- head elements inside compounds, i.e. in circumstances in which unimpaired children (and adults) would typically not use regular plurals. We argue that the excessive use of the regular -s plural in WS results from an impairment of the lexical system and/or its access mecha- nisms. The dissociation between lexical and grammatical phenomena in WS supports the the- oretical distinction between listed lexical entries and a (rule-based) computational system for language. 0 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. We are grateful to the children who participated in this study as well as their parents and teachers. We also thank Peter Gordon for providing us with experimental materials and Carolyn Mervis, Christine Temple, Martina Penke, Claudia Felser, and Heather van der Lely for commenting on earlier versions. We are also grateful to Andrew Radford for a close reading of the paper and for correcting our English and to Jamie B. Pearson for drawing pictures for Experiment 3. Our research on Williams Syndrome is supported by a grant from the Research-Promotion Fund, University of Essex, jointly awarded to Chris- tine Temple and Harald Clahsen. * Corresponding author. Phone: +44 1206 872228; Fax: +44 1206 872085; E-mail: harald@essex.ac.uk; Mayella Almazan is now at the Faculdad de Lenguas y Lettras, Universidad de Queretaro, Mexico. 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter 0 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00047-4 730 H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua III (2001) 729-757 1. Introduction Many linguists, particularly those working from a generative perspective, assume that the language faculty has an internal modular organization and that it consists minimally of two separate systems, a lexicon of listed or stored entries, and a com- putational system of abstract rule-like operations to form larger expressions from lexical entries (Chomsky, 1995). Computational operations form a finite set of (typ- ically) combinatorial mechanisms that may apply recursively and manipulate abstract symbols such as [&VI or grammatical features such as tense, person, num- ber, etc. While these assumptions appear to be relatively uncontroversial among linguists, a glance over the fence reveals that the internal modularity and the assumed dual structure of language (lexical entries vs. rules of language) are often treated with scepticism outside linguistic circles. Some researchers have even developed alterna- tive non-modular conceptions of language. Particularly influential in recent years have been associative approaches to language which have been implemented as computer-aided connectionist networks, e.g. various networks of inflectional phe- nomena (Rumelhart and McClelland, 1986; Plunkett and Marchman, 1996; Plunkett and Nakisa, 1997; Nakisa et al., 2000) and Elman™s (1993) network of subject-verb agreement in English. The aim is to simulate phenomena that used to be accounted for in terms of linguistic rules in associative networks which do not rely on mental grammars or any of the kind of computational operations that are posited in linguis- tic theory. Some researchers have taken these simulations as evidence that the knowledge of language should better be represented in terms of connectionist net- works with associatively linked units, rather than in terms of modular linguistic the- ories (Bates and Carnevale, 1993; Seidenberg, 1997; Churchland, 1995; Elman et al., 1996). It would, in our view, be unwise for linguists to ignore this challenge and to take the internal modularity of language simply for granted. Instead, the case for internal modularity and the hypothesized dual structure of language may be strengthened by providing relevant empirical evidence. One important source of evidence that might bear on these issues comes from selective impairments or dissociations in the lin- guistic skills of language-disordered populations. The rationale is that if one can show that two phenomena A and B are dissociated, such that A is selectively impaired in one population (where B is spared) and that B is selectively impaired in another population (where A is spared), then this suggests that A and B are indepen- dent and are supported by different mental representations or mechanisms. This type of argument has been used in many studies of language breakdown to support the internal modularity of language (see Levy and Kaht, 1999 for a recent review). We have investigated subjects with Williams Syndrome (WS) from this perspec- tive. WS is a genetic disorder resulting in impaired cognitive abilities but relatively spared linguistic abilities. In a previous study (Clahsen and Almazan, 1998), we examined past tense formation and two syntactic phenomena (passives, anaphoric binding) in a group of English-speaking WS subjects. In the present study, we will analyze plural formation and plurals inside compounds in the same group of WS H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 131 subjects. The results from both studies converge and demonstrate an unusual within- language dissociation in WS subjects. We found that the WS subjects exhibit excel- lent performance on regular inflection and on syntactic tasks, whereas on irregular inflection they performed much worse. It will be argued that the rule-based (compu- tational) system of language is spared in WS, whereas lexical skills (required for irregular inflection) exhibit impairments. A comparison with results from studies of Specific Language Impairment (SLI) reveals the opposite pattern, i.e. poor perfor- mance on syntactic tasks and regular inflection paired with relatively well-preserved lexical skills (see Section 8). Taken together, these findings provide empirical sup- port for the internal modularity of language and for a separate computational system that can be selectively spared in WS, and impaired in SLI. 2. Linguistic aspects of Williams Syndrome The reason for the particular interest that the study of WS has recently received is the syndrome™s rather unusual profile of general cognitive deficits and learning dif- ficulties paired with relative strength in language. This pattern provides a potential source of evidence on the controversial issue of the modularity of mind and language (Fodor, 1983). With an incidence estimated at between 1 in 20,000 and 1 in 50,000, WS is a rel- atively rare disorder (Greenberg, 1990). In genetic terms, WS is an autosomal dom- inant disorder with most cases representing a new genetic mutation, resulting from a microdeletion within one elastin gene and its surrounding DNA on chromosome 7 (Ewart et al., 1993; Frangiskakis et al., 1996). It is a disorder with various physical manifestations, including congenital heart diseases, gastrointestinal problems, low birth weight and growth retardation (Chapman et al., 1995). Because of cardiovas- cular defects, WS individuals have a reduced life expectancy (Greenberg, 1990). As well as these defects, WS individuals have a very characteristic facial expression, with small upturned noses, full cheeks and lips, a wide mouth, and long, prominent ears (Hovis and Butler, 1997). Behaviourally, WS individuals are often friendly and sociable but emotionally insecure and easily distractible. The question of whether there is a fundamental dissociation between linguistic and non-linguistic skills in WS individuals is controversial. In several previous stud- ies, it has been argued that linguistic skills are relatively well preserved in WS and that grammar is selectively spared (Bellugi et al., 1988, 1994; Wang and Bellugi, 1994). Bellugi and her collaborators argued that in contrast to their poor general cog- nitive and visuospatial functioning, WS subjects (age range: 10 years and above) demonstrate excellent command of complex expressive morphology and syntax, including full passives, embedded relative clauses, a range of conditionals, and mul- tiple embeddings. They also showed good metalinguistic skills as evidenced by reli- able grammaticality judgements. On the other hand, Mervis et al. (1999) reports results from a study of 7- to &year old English-speaking children and adults with WS indicating that their level of gram- matical ability (as measured in terms of performance on standardized language tests 732 H. Clahsen and M. Alrnazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 such as the TROG, Bishop, 1983) is consistent with their level of composite mental abilities. This is taken to indicate that the dissociation between language abilities and cognition in WS is more apparent than real. Similarly, Volterra et al. (1996), in a study examining Italian children with WS (age range: 4; 10 to 1.5;3) in comparison with mental age matched normal controls, found that the WS subjects were not ahead of their mental age controls in their linguistic skills, except in the phonologi- cal fluency test in which subjects were asked to generate all the words they can think of beginning with a particular letter. They also reported examples of morpho-syntac- tic errors, e.g. in subject-verb agreement, incorrect use of infinitives in sentences that require finite verbs, and incorrect substitutions of prepositions. Volterra et al. con- clude that the profile found in WS cannot be used as evidence for a dissociation between language and cognition; see also Capirci et al. (1996) and Karmiloff-Smith et al. (1997) for similar views. However, these authors also stress (along with Bel- lugi and her collaborators) that ﬁWS displays a verbal advantage over nonverbal intelligenceﬂ (Karmiloff-Smith et al., 1997: 275), particularly in older WS children and adults, suggesting that the linguistic characteristics of WS cannot be directly derived from their reduced nonverbal intelligence. In contrast to the question of how language and cognition are related in WS, com- paratively little research has been directed towards understanding the nature of the underlying linguistic competence in WS individuals. This is particularly true for the domain of grammar, i.e. syntax and morphology, which many linguists would regard as the core of the language faculty. Most previous studies of grammatical skills in WS rely on traditional school grammar categories and do not make use of concepts and notions from linguistic theory. The linguistic data in the WS studies mentioned above have the form of mean test scores or example utterances. We believe that the study of WS will benefit from a linguistically more informed approach. What is required on a descriptive level is a linguistic profile of WS, i.e. a precise and com- prehensive analysis of the grammatical problems of WS subjects. Furthermore, since the linguistic problems in WS do not seem to follow straightforwardly from any gen- eral cognitive impairments, it is worth exploring the possibility of explaining poten- tial disorders or delays of linguistic knowledge in WS in terms of selective impair- ments within the language faculty itself. A linguistic approach offers a way of looking at WS in this way. Some steps in this direction were taken by Clahsen and Almazan (1998) in a study of the grammatical skills of four WS children (age range: 11;2 to 15;4). The study focused on two syntactic phenomena (passives, anaphoric binding) and a morpho- logical one, past-tense marking of regular and irregular verbs by using a range of elicited language production and comprehension experiments. It was found that in the passives and binding experiments, the WS subjects performed at ceiling in all conditions, achieving even higher correctness scores than the unimpaired controls. Regular past-tense marking was also unimpaired, and the WS children achieved the same high correctness scores as unimpaired controls. On irregular verbs, however, the WS subjects performed much worse, with only 42% correct compared to 78% correct for the controls. The WS subjects were found to heavily overapply the regu- lar -ed rule, even to nonce words that rhyme with existing irregulars. These results H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 133 were explained in terms of a dual-mechanism model of inflection according to which irregular past-tense forms are stored as subnodes in structured lexical entries while regular past-tense forms are based on an inflectional rule (‚Add -ed™); see Pinker (1999) and Clahsen (1999) for discussion. The pattern found in WS children indi- cates that they are impaired in accessing subnode information from lexical entries (required for retrieving irregulars), while their computational system (required for syntax and regular inflection) seems to be intact. An example of a structured lexical entry is shown in (1): (1) [draiv],, LW+pret We suggest that subnodes for irregular verbs, along with the correct pairing of phonological stings and morphological feature values, are available to WS subjects, but that either the content of the subnodes for the irregulars or the link to the basic entry, or both, is not always accessible. If the content of a subnode such as [..ow]+rret in (1) cannot be retrieved, -ed affixation applies, and hence the frequent overregu- larization errors in WS subjects. The purpose of the present study is to further explore potential linguistic impair- ments in WS by investigating plural formation and plurals inside compounds. The linguistic focus will be on the constraint that blocks the insertion of regular plurals inside compounds. Note that irregular plural nouns such as teeth, mice, etc. can read- ily appear as initial parts or non-heads in compounds in English, while plural nouns formed by adding the suffix -s cannot be used productively in this position, e.g. teeth marks versus *nails marks; mice eater versus *rats eater. Thus regular and irregular inflection relate to compounding differently. It has been argued that this difference follows from the internal representation of irregular and regular inflection and the way they are related to the process of compounding. Whereas irregular plurals form separate lexical entries that can be fed into compounding just like uninflected stems, regular plurals do not have stored representations that the (lexical) compounding mechanism could access, hence the ungrammaticality of *rats eater. The study of plural formation and plurals-inside-compounds in WS children will shed light onto their linguistic system and in particular on how different morphological processes interact. 3. Linguistic background 3.1. Compounding and plural inflection in English Like many other languages, English has two ways of forming compounds, phrasal and lexical compounding (see e.g. Lieber, 1992). The latter involves concatenations of lexical units such as stems or words and produces familiar compounds such as cat 734 H. Clahsen and M. Alrnazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 food, dinner plate, dish washer, etc., a very common and productive process in Eng- lish. However, compounds may occasionally contain non-head elements that are clearly phrasal. The range of possible phrases in such compounds is virtually unre- stricted, e.g. over-the-fence gossip, God-is-dead theology, off-the-rack dress, and includes regular -s plurals, e.g. red rats balloon. To capture such cases, it has been suggested that the non-head elements of phrasal compounds are formed in the syn- tax (see Sproat, 1985; Wiese, 1996 for discussion). Thus, in a phrasal compound such as red rats balloon, the phrase [red rats] is formed in the syntax and is then presented for compounding on a second pass through the lexicon, yielding the phrasal compound [[red rats] balloon]]. For this reason, phrasal compounds are sometimes called ‚recursive™ (Kiparsky, 1982). The lexical compound rat balloon, on the other hand, requires just one pass through the lexicon and is therefore non- recursive. In contrast to phrasal compounds, which can host any kind of non-head element, lexical compounds are constrained by the fact that irregular but not regular -s plural forms may occur as non-head elements inside lexical compounds. The distribution of plurals-inside-compounds coincides with the distinction between lexically stored (irregular) and rule-based (regular) inflection. Thus, given that lexical compounding concatenates lexical entries, it follows that irregular plurals (because they have lexi- cal entries) can be fed into the compounding process, whereas rule-based forms such as -s plurals (which do not have lexical entries) cannot be included in the com- pounding process. There are several linguistic implementations to capture these facts. The theory of Lexical Phonology/Morphology (Kiparsky, 1982) was the first attempt to derive the distribution of plurals-inside-compounds from the principles of a linguistic theory. Lexical Phonology contains a sub-theory, that of Level Ordering, according to which regular inflection is claimed to be represented on a separate level which is strictly ordered after the level concerned with other morphological processes such as irregu- lar inflection, derivation, and compounding. Thus, regular inflectional affixes are prevented from appearing inside compounds. Level Ordering has since come under attack for a number of reasons, and other morphologists have developed alternative theories that account for the constraints on pluralization in compounds. Di Sciullo and Williams (1987) claim that lexical compounding joins stems rather than words, and that irregular plurals should be regarded as stems and regular plurals as words. Similarly, Borer (1988) posits that compounding takes stored words out of the lexi- con and that irregular plurals, but not regular ones, are listed in the lexicon. The idea that is common to these accounts is that the use of plural forms inside lexical com- pounds correlates with the distinction between stored and computationally-based plural forms, and this will be the focus of our study. 3.2. Plural formation and plurals-inside-compounds in child language In his seminal study, Gordon (1985) examined the question of whether the con- straint on regular plurals in lexical compounds is operative in early child language or whether it has to be learned through experience. Gordon used an elicited-production H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 735 task which prompted children to first produce a plural form of a given item X (e.g. mouse + mice) and subsequently a derived compound of the X-eater type (e.g. mouse-eater or mice-eater). Gordon found that in more than 90% of the novel com- pounds produced by the children the plural -s is not used on the non-head element; this even holds for the youngest children, i.e. the 3-year-olds. Overregularizations like *moues sometimes occurred as a simple noun but never within a compound such as ﬁmouses-eater. Furthermore, it was found that as soon as the children have acquired irregular plurals they sometimes use them inside compounds (as in mice- eater). Thus children behaved essentially like adults: they were willing to say mice- eater and unwilling to say *ruts-eater. Gordon interprets these results as support for the early availability of the morphological ordering constraint in children. Clahsen et al. (1996) replicated Gordon™s experiment with 3- to 8-year-old German children. They found a correlation between overregularization and plurals-inside-compounds: plural forms that are used in overregularizations tend to be omitted from the non- head elements of lexical compounds. This indicates that even though the children™s plural forms might be incorrect in terms of the adult grammar, the ordering con- straint on plurals-inside-compounds is still operative in the child™s grammar. Returning to English, Alegre and Gordon (1996) presented results from a compre- hension experiment testing the role of the constraint against regular plurals in com- pounds. In their task, 3- to 5-year-old children were presented with pairs of pictures representing objects such as a red rut(s) eater. In one set of pictures, the eater was painted red, in the other picture the victim was red. Half of the children were tested with plural forms, and the other half were tested with the singular form inside com- pounds. Alegre and Gordon found that in the plural condition the children chose the recursive interpretation [[red ruts] eater], i.e, the picture where the rats are red, rather than the picture in which the eater is red. By contrast, the children showed no such preference in the singular condition. Thus, the constraint on regular plurals inside lexical compounds triggered a syntactically-based analysis of the expression red ruts as an NP. In the singular condition, however, the construction is ambiguous between a non-recursive interpretation [red [rat eater]] and an NP-based interpretation [[red rut] eater], and thus children showed no preference. This finding confirms that the ordering constraint is available to young unimpaired children, just as it is to adults. 3.3. Predictions for WS Our previous research indicates that lexical retrieval is not functioning normally in WS subjects. Specifically, we have argued that WS subjects are impaired in accessing information from subnodes of lexical entries. This is how we explained their poor performance in irregular past tense formation and their frequent -ed over- regularizations (Clahsen and Almazan, 1998). This impairment in retrieving infor- mation from stored lexical entries should also affect other inflectional phenomena as well as the way WS subjects form compounds. Similar to the past tense, plural for- mation in English involves an (-s) affixation rule for regulars as well as a small num- ber of irregular forms such as mice, teeth which are stored as subnodes of structured lexical entries (see (2)). 136 H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 (2) [maus] I [..ai..l+plu, Hence, if access to subnode information is impaired in WS subjects, we would expect to find errors in the formation of irregular noun plurals, e.g. -s plural over- regularizations. In unpublished work, Bromberg et al. (1994) reported that the WS subjects they tested had no trouble forming -s plurals of existing and novel nouns, whereas there were errors in irregulars. In the present study, we will further investi- gate plural formation in WS. The hypothesized impairment should also have consequences for the WS sub- jects™ compound formations. In past-tense inflection, the WS subjects have shown difficulty with lexical exceptions, i.e. with irregular past-tense forms. Similarly, we might expect that their compound formations are not constrained by lexical factors, i.e. the WS subjects should allow regular -s plurals inside compounds. To investigate plural formation and plurals-inside-compounds, three experimental tasks were adopted from the developmental literature, two elicited production exper- iments, one for derived and the other for root compounds (Gordon, 1985; Clahsen et al., 1996), and one comprehension experiment on non-recursive vs. recursive com- pounding (Alegre and Gordon, 1996). The experiments were administered to the WS subjects and to control groups of unimpaired children with chronological ages simi- lar to the mental ages of the WS children. We will also compare the results from our WS subjects with findings on SLI children using similar tasks. 4. Subjects We investigated 4 English native-speaking children (Jane, Florence, Emily and Martin) who were independently diagnosed with WS by a multidisciplinary team including geneticists, developmental psychologists and consultant paediatricians. The subjects™ chronological ages are as follows: Jane 11;2, Florence 12;7, Emily 13; 1, Martin 15;4. Their mental ages were derived from scores on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children - IIIuk (Wechsler, 1992), by averaging the mental age equivalents for each WISC-III subtest (see Temple et al., 2000). By this method, Emily and Jane had mental ages of 5;4 and 5;7, whilst Florence and Mar- tin had mental ages of 7;5 and 7;7 respectively. Results from administering the British Picture Vocabulary Test (Dunn et al., 1982) to these children revealed that for all the WS subjects, age equivalent receptive vocabulary scores were higher than their mental ages: Emily: 9;6, Jane: 6;8, Florence: 10;2, Martin: 7;9. In the Test of Reception of Grammar (TROG, Bishop, 1983), Florence and Martin achieved near-ceiling scores, well above their mental ages. Emily™s and Jane™s TROG scores came out lower and were similar to their mental age (5;0--5; 11). However, many of the incorrect responses Emily and Jane produced in the TROG were lexical (rather than grammatical) errors, i.e. comprehension problems with H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 137 lexical prepositions (confusing above and below), conjunctions (neither and nor) and comparative adjectives. 5. Experiment 1: Plural formation and derived compounding The first experiment investigates regular and irregular plural formation as well as the use of plurals inside derived compounds of the X-eater type. The procedures and materials were taken from Gordon™s (1985) experiment. There were 18 items to be used as non-head elements of the compounds, 5 irregular nouns, 5 regular nouns, 4 pluralia tantum nouns, and 4 regular equivalents of the pluralia tantum nouns; these items are shown in the appendix. The regular and irregular nouns were semantically similar to each other; there were 4 additional regular nouns paired with the pluralia tantum nouns. The pairs knife/scissors and shirt/trousers were semantically matched, the pair toy/clothes was chosen, because they are both superordinate terms, and shoel(sun)glasses was chosen, because the referent of the noun shoe exhibits similar configurational properties to (a pair of) glasses (since we are dealing with pluraliza- tion); see Gordon (1985) for further details. 5.1. Method The same procedure was followed for every item. A primary experimenter ran the experiment, while an assistant prepared the toys for each trial. All experimental ses- sions were audio-taped. The experiment involved three steps. Step 1: The primary experimenter presented the child with a single item, e.g., a duck, and asked the child to name the item with the sentence ‚What™s that?‚. Step 2: The child was presented with several instances. of the item (e.g., four ducks). The child was asked to provide the plural, using the sentence ‚Here we have a bunch of . . . what?™ Step 3: Using the child™s plural response from the preceding step, the child was asked ‚And now Bernie eats all the <PLURAL RESPONSE>. And how do you call somebody who eats <PLURAL RESPONSE>?. The answer to this is the child™s ‚compound response™. The children™s plural responses in step 2 and their compound responses in step 3 were analyzed separately. Rates of correct plural marking and overregularization rates were calculated for step 2 responses as shown in (a) and (b). For the children™s compound responses in step 3, we determined plural omission rates in compounds as shown in (c): (# of correct plural forms ) a. correct plural marking rate: (# of correct plurals + # of incorrect plurals) 738 H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 1 I I (2001) 729-757 b. overregularization rate : (# of overregularizations) (# of overregularizations + # of correct irregulars) c. omission rate: (# plurals omitted in compounds) (# plur. omitted iu compounds + # plur. retained in camp.) The subject groups selected for comparison with the WS subjects were two sub- groups of unimpaired children who had chronological ages similar to the mental ages of our WS subjects. The selection of controls for studies of children with learning disabilities is often controversial. One might argue, for example, that WS children, who are hypothesized to have selective cognitive sparings, should be matched with control subjects for specific cognitive abilities. This would indeed be particularly rel- evant for demonstrating dissociations between language and non-linguistic cogni- tion. The present study, however, examines potential dissociations within the lin- guistic system of WS subjects. In addition to that, it is far from clear which cognitive abilities are to be chosen as the crucial matching criteria. We have therefore decided to use a relatively general measure of cognitive ability to select controls for the WS subjects. It should also be noted that the decision to match the children with WS with overall mental age controls has been an accepted protocol in many previous studies on WS (e.g. Bellugi et al., 1988; Volterra et al., 1996; Tyler et al., 1997). The control data for the present experiment were taken from Gordon (1985) and from Christian (1997). The children in these studies all underwent Gordon™s original experiment. Table 1 Control subjects Control group Chronological age Mean Range CTR-5 (n=ll) Gordon (1985) CTR-6 (n=12) Christian (1997) 5;6 5;0-5; 10 6;4 5;4-7; 10 5.2. Results The first analysis concerns the children™s responses in step 2, when they had to produce plural forms of the items presented. The WS children marked the plural overtly in 93% (48/52) of the items. Table 2 shows that with respect to nouns that take regular plurals, the WS subjects achieved high correctness scores, virtually the same as those by the unimpaired controls. On nouns that take irregular plurals, how- ever, the WS subjects performed worse than the control subjects. This difference can H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 139 be seen for both age groups, even though it is less pronounced for the Syear-olds, due to the relatively low correctness score for the unimpaired children who are still producing 48% incorrect irregular plurals. The last column in Table 2 shows chil- dren™s overregularization in step 2, excluding singular forms and non-plural forms. For the Syear-old WS children, the rate is 40%, roughly the same as for the control children, and for the 7-year-old WS children the overregularization rate is higher than for the controls. For the unimpaired controls, the rate is still higher than might be expected from the spontaneous speech of unimpaired children, but in line with estimates from elicited speech (Marcus et al., 1992). Table 2 Percentages of correct plurals and overregularizations Group ws5 ws7 CTR5 CTR6 Correct regulars 100% 100% 96% 93% Correct irregulars 40% 50% 52% 87% Overregularizations 40% 20% 44% 13% Consider now plurals inside compounds, i.e. the results from step 3 of this experi- ment. In Table 3 we compare the plural form supplied by the children in step 2 with the compound form produced in step 3. The first column represents cases in which the plural -s must be omitted from inside compounds, i.e. regular nouns (e.g. ruts) and the regular equivalents of pluralia tantum nouns (e.g. shoes) that were correctly inflected in step 2 as well as irregulars that were overregularized in step 2 (e.g. *mouses). The second column comprises cases in which the plural form can be maintained inside compounds, i.e. irregular plurals and pluralia tantum nouns. The table shows percentages; the average number of omissions per subject is shown in parentheses. Table 3 Percentage of omission of plurals in derived compounds Group ws5 ws7 CTRS CTR6 Omissions of the regular -s plural 82% (9) 45% (4.5) 96% (10.8) 94% (8.7) Omissions of irregulars and pluralia tantum forms 58% (3.5) 36% (2.5) 25% (1.5) 41% (3.4) Table 3 shows that the unimpaired children of both age groups show the expected pattern. They drop the regular -s plural from inside compounds in 223 out of 235 cases, i.e. in 95%, whereas they omit irregular plurals in just 34%, i.e. in 58 out of 168 cases. Gordon (1985) and Christian (1997) showed that this difference came out 740 H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua III (2001) 729-757 as statistically significant in both groups of control children. It is clear from these data that regular and irregular noun plurals behave differently with respect to com- pounds in unimpaired children. Overall, the WS children tend to omit plurals from inside compounds less often than unimpaired children. As is clear from the second column of Table 3, the WS5 subjects omitted more irregular plurals from inside compounds than the correspond- ing control children (58% vs. 25%), whereas the WS5 children omitted fewer regu- lar plurals in compounds than the control children (82% vs. 96%). The WS7 children are similar to the unimpaired controls with respect to irregular plurals in compounds (36%, 41%). For regular plurals, however, the WS7 children performed much worse than the controls (45% vs. 94%). Overall, the WS children incorrectly maintained the regular -s in 36%, compared to 5% for the controls. In contrast to the unimpaired children, the WS subjects do not show a clear regu- lar-irregular difference with respect to compounding. A by-item paired t-test revealed no statistically significant difference for the WS children between the use of regular and irregular plurals inside compounds (t(8) = -0.61, p = 0.56). This is also clear from the individual subject data. There are individual differences between the WS children in their plural omissions. Crucially, however, none of the WS subjects showed a clear regular/irregular distinction with respect to compounding. Martin maintained 9 regular plurals inside compounds and 6 irregulars, Emily had 3 regu- lars and 4 irregulars, Florence 2 regulars and 3 irregulars, and Jane 1 regular and 2 irregulars. Examples are rurs eater (Emily), ducks eater (Jane), beads eater (Flo- rence), babies eater (Martin). Thus, in contrast to the unimpaired children, the WS children do not selectively omit regular plurals in compounds. This suggests that the constraint against regular plurals inside compounds is not operative in WS subjects in the same way as it is in unimpaired children and in adults. 6. Experiment 2: Plural formation and root compounding In contrast to Experiment 1, in which the second constituent is fixed (= -eater) and is a derived word form, in the present task the second constituent can be chosen at random, and it is a simple noun yielding a root compound. The technique was adopted from Clahsen et al. (1996). Again, if the morphological ordering constraint is available to children, we would expect them to omit regular plurals from inside compounds. Experimental items were 7 with irregular plurals, 15 with regular plu- rals and 4 pluralia tantum nouns; the items are shown in the appendix. 6.1. Method The stimuli for this experiment consist of two sets of picture cards, plural cards and singular cards. Each card consists of a photograph taken from magazine adver- tisements. The singular cards contain one object, the plural cards multiple objects. The experiment involves three steps. Step 1: Step 2: Step 3: H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 741 The experimenter chooses a card containing multiple objects and asks the child to name it. The child is asked to choose a picture card with a singular item and to name it. The experimenter holds both picture cards together, the plural card on the left and the singular card on the right, encouraging the child to form a com- pound by asking: ‚Can you form a word out of these two?‚. Following this procedure, 26 trials were presented to each child. The child™s response in step 1 is the plural form of the particular items, and the child™s response in step 3 the compound form. This experiment was administered to the WS subjects and to 20 unimpaired chil- dren with chronological ages similar to the mental ages of the WS children, 10 with a mean age of 5;5 (age range: 5; 1 to 5;lO) and 10 with a mean age of 7;5 (age range: 7; 1 to 7; 10). All controls live in native English-speaking homes and were randomly selected by date of birth from a state school in North-East London. Sub- jects who had any known neurological abnormality, learning difficulties or a history of special needs were excluded. 6.2. Results As in the previous experiment, we will first examine correctness and overregular- ization scores for plural marking. Table 4 shows that for nouns that take regular plu- rals, the WS subjects achieved the same high correctness scores as the unimpaired controls, whereas for irregular nouns they performed much worse than the control subjects. This is similar to the findings of Experiment 1, but the contrast between the WS and the unimpaired children is even stronger than in the first experiment. A repeated measures ANOVA revealed significant interactions between subject group and the plural correctness scores (F(3,20) = 70.97, p < 0.01). Subsequent post-hoc tests (using Tukey-HSD) showed that both groups of control children achieved sig- nificantly higher correctness scores on nouns that require irregular plurals than the two corresponding groups of WS children (WS5 vs. CTRS: q = 67.3, p < 0.01, WS7 vs. CTR7: q = 48.6, p < 0.01). Table 4 Percentages of correct plurals and overregularizations Group Correct regulars Correct irregulars WS5 100% 28.5% ws7 100% 50% CTRS 100% 96% cTR7 100% 98.5% Overregularizations 50% 35.7% 4% 1.4% The last column of Table 4 shows that the WS children frequently overgeneralized -s to nouns that require irregular plurals in English. This is in contrast to the two 742 H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 groups of unimpaired control children where -s plural overregularizations were prac- tically non-existent. The finding that the WS subjects heavily overapply the regular plural is parallel to the results of Experiment 1 and confirms previous findings from Bromberg et al. (1994). Consider now plurals inside noun-noun compounds. The first column in Table 5 shows omission rates of regular -s plurals and irregulars that were over-regularized in step 1. The second column shows how many irregulars and pluralia tantum plurals were omitted in compounds. Omission rates were calculated in the same way as in Experiment 1. Table 5 shows percentages; the average number of omissions per sub- ject is shown in parantheses. Table 5 Percentage of omission of plurals in N-N compounds Group Omissions of the regular -s plural Omissions of irregulars and pluralia tantum forms WS5 27% (5) 0% (0) ws7 17.1% (3) 17.6% (1.5) CTR5 92.6% (13.9) 54.5% (6) CTR7 94.6% (14.2) 60% (6.6) As is clear from Table 5, the control subjects showed the expected pattern of reduc- tion of -s plurals inside compounds, whereas for irregulars and pluralia tantum nouns omission is optional and the plural forms are less often omitted. A by-item paired t- test revealed statistically significant differences between the use of regular and irreg- ular plurals inside compounds for both groups of unimpaired children (CTRS: t( 10) = 2.89, p < 0.05; CTR7: t(l0) = 2.51, p < 0.05). Jn the WS data, however, there was no significant difference between the use of regular and irregular plurals inside com- pounds. Most strikingly, the WS subjects preferred to maintain regular plurals in compounds instead of omitting them, leading to 56 cases of incorrect compounds with -s plurals as non-head elements. This holds for both correct -s plurals as well as for -s plural overregularizations, as illustrated by the following examples: (3) a. Correct -s plurals bananas trumpet onions brush snakes ball mountains carrot b. Overregularizations foots cake (Emily) tooths pizza (Jane) womans circle (Florence) gooses fax (Martin) This is in marked contrast to the control children who maintained just 6% of the cor- rect regular -s plurals, and never one of the overregularized plural affixes. A repeated measures ANOVA revealed significant interactions between subject group and the plural form used in compounds (F(3,20) = 6.86, p < 0.05). Subsequent post- hoc tests (using Tukey-HSD) showed that both groups of control children omitted H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 143 significantly more -s plural inside compounds than the two corresponding groups of WS subjects (WS5 vs. CTRS: q = 65.6, p < 0.01, WS7 vs. CTR7: q = 78.0, p < 0.01). The results show that while unimpaired children systematically bar the regular plural -s from appearing in compounds, this does not hold for the WS children. The WS children were found to use more -s plural overregularizations than unimpaired children, achieving significantly lower correctness scores on irregular plurals, and they often maintain regular -s plurals inside compounds. This provides further evi- dence that the morphological constraint is not operative in these children. 7. Experiment 3: Plural formation and recursive compounding In our third experiment, we used a comprehension task to examine the constraint against regular plurals inside compounds. Recall from Section 3.1 that there are two ways of forming compounds in English, non-recursive (lexical) and recursive (phrasal) compounding. While non-recursive compounding is restricted, for example by the constraint against regular plurals as non-head elements, the range of possible elements in recursive compounds is virtually unrestricted, including regular -s plu- rals. As pointed out in Section 3.2, 5year-old unimpaired children are sensitive to this distinction. Presentation of a regular plural form (‚Show me the red rats bal- loon™) leads children to accept a recursive interpretation. However, when they are presented with a singular form of the same noun (‚Show me the red rat balloon™), there was no such preference. This, according to Alegre and Gordon (1996), shows that the constraint against regular plurals in lexical compounds prevents children from accepting a non-recursive interpretation. With respect to WS children we would expect a different pattern of results. If the non-head elements used in compounds are not restricted in these children, as sug- gested by the results of the previous two experiments, the presence of a regular -s plural on the non-head element should not affect their compound interpretations. Whatever is their preferred interpretation in the singular condition (‚Show me the red rut balloon) should also be the preferred interpretation in the plural condition (‚Show me the red rats balloon™). 7.1. Method We adopted Alegre and Gordon™s (1996) procedure. The children were presented with nine coloured cards and were asked to name their colour. The children were presented with pairs of pictures depicting an animal or monster of colour X eating other animals of colour Y, e.g. a red monster eating blue rats. The second picture in each pair showed the same event, but the colours were reversed, a blue monster eat- ing red rats. Half of the pictures depicted a single victim, e.g. one rat being eaten, and the other half showed several victims. Children were presented with each pair of pictures and asked to identify the creatures shown as well as the colours. They were then asked to pick one of the pictures from each pair by answering questions such as 144 H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 ‚Can you point to the picture that shows the red rat eater?™ (= the singular condi- tion), or ‚Can you point to the picture that shows the red rats eater?™ (= the plural condition). There were 30 ‚point-to-the™-type questions, instead of just 8 as in Ale- gre and Gordon. Of these 30 questions, 15 were in the singular condition and 15 in the plural condition. It was ensured that none of the stimuli would semantically bias the children to choose one interpretation over the other; see the appendix for a com- plete item list. Stress assignment, pauses and intonation were controlled for following the proce- dures outlined in Alegre and Gordon. The items were randomized for presentation, and the same pattern of questioning was used for all of them. We also independently assessed the children™s knowledge of colour terms by asking them to name the colours of nine picture cards depicting all the colours used in the experiment. Children were tested individually in a quiet room. The experiment was adminis- tered to the WS children and to two groups of unimpaired children who live in native British English-speaking homes in West Yorkshire. The children were randomly selected by date of birth from a state school. There was one group of 10 unimpaired children with a mean age of 5;5 (range: 5;3-5;9) and another group of 10 unim- paired children with a mean age of 7;4 (range: 7;2-7; 10). None of the controls was known to have any neurological abnormality, learning difficulty or a history of spe- cial needs. 7.2. Results All subjects, the WS children as well as the controls, performed the pre-test colour-naming task in an error-free fashion. Table 6 presents percentages of non- recursive interpretations for the two experimental conditions; the average number of non-recursive interpretations is shown in parentheses. Recall that the non-recursive interpretation refers to the picture in which the eater (not the victim) is of the stated colour. Table 6. Percentage of non-recursive interpretations Group Singular condition (‚ the red rat eater™) Plural condition (‚. . . the red rats eater™) wss 76.6% (11.5) 83% (12.5) ws7 80% (12) 83% (12.5) CTR5 45% (6.5) 18.2% (3) CTR7 62% (10.2) 8.5% (1.2) A clear contrast emerges from these data between the WS subjects and the unim- paired children. For both groups of unimpaired children, there is a significant decrease of non-recursive interpretations in the plural condition; a by-item paired t- test revealed statistically significant differences between the compound interpreta- tion chosen in the singular and the plural condition for both groups of unimpaired H. Clahsen and M. Almzan I Lingua 1 I I (2001) 729-757 74.5 children (CTRS: t(14) = 5.56, p < 0.01; CTR7: t(14) = 4.47, p < 0.01). However, the WS data indicate that these children do not distinguish between the singular and the plural condition in the use of non-recursive interpretations. Table 6 also shows that in both groups of unimpaired children, the percentages of (incorrect) non-recursive interpretations in the plural condition are much lower than for the WS children. This is also confirmed statistically. A repeated measures ANOVA revealed significant interactions between subject group and compound interpretation, F(3,22) = 3.28, p < 0.05. Pairwise comparisons revealed no significant differences between subject groups in the singular condition, indicating that the WS children like the unimpaired controls preferred the non-recursive interpretation in this condition. For the plural condition, however, there were significant group differences, showing that the WS children had significantly more (incorrect) non-recursive interpretations than the control children. In other words, when the WS children are presented with a singular non-head ele- ment, such as Show me rhe red rat eater, they perform much like unimpaired chil- dren, giving relatively few recursive interpretations. Recall that in this condition, subjects are free to interpret the compound as recursive or as non-recursive. In most of these cases, the WS children went for the non-recursive interpretation. This pref- erence corresponds to the general tendency to avoid left-branching structures in Eng- lish. Note that while the non-recursive interpretation of these compounds is based on a simple right-branching structure (e.g. [the [red] [rat eater]]), left branching is required for the recursive interpretation ([the [red rat] eater]). It is therefore not sur- prising that children avoid recursive interpretations if grammatically possible. Interestingly, however, the WS subjects (but not the unimpaired controls) also went for the non-recursive interpretation in the plural condition, when they were instructed to show the red rats eater, even though the non-recursive interpretation is ruled out by the constraint that prohibits regular plurals inside lexical compounds. In this case, there is only one correct interpretation, namely the recursive interpretation. Summarizing, there are two indications from this experiment that the ordering constraint is operative in unimpaired children, near-ceiling performance in the plural condition, and a marked increase of recursive interpretations from the singular to the plural condition. By contrast, for the WS subjects we found many incorrect interpre- tations in the plural condition and no increase of recursive interpretations from the singular to the plural condition. Hence, there are no signs that the constraint has any effect on the WS children™s responses. 8. Discussion In the following, we will discuss the present set of findings on plural marking and on plurals inside compounds in WS in combination with the results of our previous study of morpho-syntactic skills in WS (Clahsen and Almazan, 1998). We argue that the WS subjects™ performance on the various linguistic tasks can be accounted for without assuming any impairments of the computational rule-based component of language, and that where WS subjects perform worse than unimpaired children, this 746 H. Clahsen and M. Almazan i Lingua Ill (2001) 729-757 is due to problems in accessing (particular kinds of) lexical information. We will also compare the grammatical profile of WS to the performance of SLI children on similar tasks. It will become clear that the grammatical profile of WS subjects does not extend to SLI. 8.1. Grammatical morphemes Analyses of the expressive language of WS subjects revealed that the utterances they produce are contextually appropriate and generally grammatically correct (Clahsen and Almazan, 1998). Most of their utterances contained multi-constituent sentences, 15% included embedded sentences, such as relative and complement clauses. Functional categories such as finiteness markings and other grammatical morphemes are well preserved in the grammars of the four WS subjects studied here; for each WS subject, the overall score of correct use of grammatical mor- phemes in obligatory contexts was close to 100%. These observations have been confirmed by Rice et al. (1999) in a study comparing spontaneous speech samples of 5- to 7-year-old SLI children and WS subjects of approximately the same chrono- logical age. Rice et al. found that the WS subjects did not drop grammatical mor- phemes in obligatory contexts and showed adult-like use of finiteness markings, whereas the SLI children they studied frequently omitted finiteness markings such as the past tense -ed and the 3rd sg. -s. The optional use of finiteness markings in SLI children has been argued to result from a delay in their development of syntax. According to Rice et al. (1995), SLI children are stuck (for an extended period) in an early stage of syntactic development, the so-called optional-infnitive stage. Wexler (1998) characterized this stage in terms of constraints on the grammatical interpreta- tion of the formal features of functional categories, e.g. the so-called Unique Check- ing Constraint (UCC). Basically, children in the optional-infinitive stage are said to have difficulty handling more than one formal feature at a time. SLI children are claimed to be severely delayed in this aspect of their computational system. The picture from WS children looks different. It is true that some previous stud- ies have reported occasional morphological errors in the expressive language of WS children (see e.g. Volterra et al., 1996; Capirci et al., 1996). Systematic error analy- ses, however, have revealed that the 11 to 15 year old WS subjects studied by Clah- sen and Almazan (1998) as well as the group of younger WS subjects studied by Rice et al. (1999) do not show a morpho-syntactic profile that would be characteris- tic of an extended optional-infinitive stage. Thus, in contrast to SLI children, the WS subjects™ system of formal features does not seem to be developmentally delayed and is (in Wexler™s terms) not subject to developmental constraints such as the UCC. 8.2. Syntactic chains and binding With respect to more complex syntactic phenomena, two experiments showed that the WS subjects studied by Clahsen and Almazan (1998) performed in an error- free fashion in interpreting verbal passives and sentences involving reflexive anaphors. These findings indicate that the relevant syntactic mechanisms, A-chains H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 147 and binding principles, are not affected inWS. SLI children, on the other hand, have been shown to perform much worse on the same tasks. Van der Lely (1996) found correctness scores of 60% to 67% for the interpretation of verbal passives in 15 SLI subjects (mean age: 11;3). Likewise, these SLI children™s scores on the interpreta- tion of sentences involving reflexive pronouns were consistently lower than those of the WS subjects and of unimpaired controls, specifically in sentences that had quan- tified antecedents (van der Lely and Stollwerck, 1997). Van der Lely (1998) has argued that the SLI children™s difficulties in these tasks result from an impairment of the computational system of language, i.e. from a ‚representational deficit with dependent relationships™. Whatever the precise nature of this deficit is, our findings show that it does not hold for WS. A-chains and binding principles seem to be unim- paired in WS children. 8.3. Overregularizations In two elicited production tasks, Clahsen and Almazan (1998) found that WS sub- jects heavily overapplied the regular past tense -ed, even in cases in which unim- paired children would typically not use the regular form. The -ed affix was (incor- rectly) supplied by the WS subjects to 38% of the existing irregular verbs tested (as opposed to 13% for the unimpaired controls), and to 65% of the nonce verbs that rhymed only with existing irregular verbs (compared to 19% for the unimpaired chil- dren). In the present study, we found that nouns taking regular plurals were always correctly inflected by the WS subjects, whereas on nouns that take irregular plurals, the WS subjects performed much worse, with only 42% correct. The WS subjects also heavily overapplied the regular plural affix, with rates which can be more than twice as high as those of unimpaired control children. These findings replicate those on the past tense indicating that inflectional rules might be excessively used in WS subjects. This is also confirmed by the results of a recent study with 2 German-speaking WS subjects (Krause and Penke, 2000). Krause and Penke found that the WS sub- jects (chronological age: 15 and 18 years) achieved high correctness scores on regu- lar participle and plural inflection, while for irregular participle and plural inflection they performed much worse than a group of unimpaired children matched for men- tal age to the WS subjects. Furthermore, Krause and Penke found that the WS sub- jects overregularized the regular -t participle, even to high-frequency irregular verbs, an error that did not occur in the control data. They also found that (in contrast to the unimpaired controls), overapplications of irregular plural patterns are practically non-existent in the WS data. These observations suggest that the regular/irregular dissociation in WS (as described in Clahsen and Almazan (1998) for English-speak- ing WS subjects) may hold cross-linguistically and for different inflectional systems. The picture on overregularization rates we get from SLI children is rather differ- ent. The two past-tense tasks we used with WS subjects were also employed with SLI children, by van der Lely and Ullman (1998) for 9- to 12-year-olds and by Oet- ting and Horohov (1997) for SLI children with a mean age of 6;3. The SLI children exhibited significantly lower overregularization rates than the WS subjects, i.e. they 748 H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 rarely produced -ed past tense forms of either existing or novel irregular verbs. Rather, the SLI children™s most frequent response was either a correct past tense form or a repetition of the base form of the verb. In contrast to WS subjects, over- regularization of -s plurals are reported to be rare in English-speaking SLI children. Van der Lely and Christian (2000) found that in the production of regular and irreg- ular plural forms, the SLI subjects they studied (aged 10 to 18 years) showed a sim- ilar performance to unimpaired control children. This result is parallel to Rice and Oetting™s (1993) findings on 5-year-old SLI children. On the other hand, several studies have reported significant frequency effects for regularly inflected plural and past-tense forms for children with SLI, but not for unimpaired controls (see e.g. Rice and Oetting, 1993; Oetting and Horohov, 1997; van der Lely and Ullman, 1998). Moreover, Gopnik and Goad (1997) performed acoustic analyses of plural markers in 9 SLI subjects (aged 9 to 77 years) to show that at least some of the SLI subjects failed to exhibit the voicing assimilation required for this affix. These findings sug- gest that the morpho-phonological rules of plural formation might not be completely adult-like in some SLI subjects, and that they may have stored representations for at least some regular forms (hence the frequency effects for regulars). In any case, what seems to be clear from the SLI data on inflectional morphology is that (unlike WS subjects) children and adults with SLI do not excessively overapply regular rules of inflection. 8.4. Plurals inside compounds Evidence from three experiments presented in this study shows that the WS chil- dren™s interpretation and production of compounds is not affected by the constraint against regular plurals in lexical compounds. In the first experiment, we found that the WS subjects maintained regular -s plurals inside compounds, producing ungram- matical derived compounds such as *rats-eater; there were also no regular/irregular differences in their compound omission rates. In Experiment 2, the WS children pro- duced many ungrammatical root compounds with regular -s plurals as non-head ele- ments. As in the first experiment, there were no significant differences between irregular plural nouns and regular -s plurals in the compound omission rates. In experiment 3, the WS children were found to frequently misinterpret compounds such as red rats eater; in contrast to unimpaired children, the presence of a regular plural did not have any effect on the WS children™s interpretation of the compound. The results from these three experiments converge on one important point, namely that in WS subjects regular plurals can freely occur inside compounds. This is dif- ferent from adult English as well as from early child language. Gordon (1985) found that even the youngest children in his sample, i.e. the 3-year-olds, were sensitive to the difference between regular and irregular plurals inside compounds. Clahsen et al. (1992, 1996) replicated Gordon™s results for German child language. All age groups of unimpaired children in the Clahsen et al. studies, even the youngest one below age 3, produced irregular plurals inside compounds and avoided regular plurals. These findings indicate that the constraint against regular plurals inside compounds is available early on and does not have to be learned in any meaningful sense. Thus, it H. CIahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 11 I (2001) 729-757 149 seems as if the pattern of plurals inside compounds observed in WS does not corre- spond to any developmental stage found in unimpaired children. SLI children have also been studied with respect to plurals inside compounds. Oetting and Rice (1993) replicated Gordon™s (1985) elicitation task with a group of 14 SLI children (mean age: 5 ; 3) and two control groups, a group of 19 unimpaired children matched for chronological age with the SLI children and a group of 12 younger unimpaired children (mean age: 2; 11) that were matched to the SLI group in terms of mean length of utterance (MLU). Oetting and Rice found that the SLI children™s response patterns were similar to those of the unimpaired children in that all three groups rarely produced a regular plural form (ruts) or an overregularized plural (*IIzouses) as the non-head element of a compound, whereas for irregulars, the majority of the nominal compounds included the plural form. This shows that SLI children treat regular and irregular noun plurals differently with respect to com- pounding, suggesting that at least in this group of English-speaking SLI children, the ordering constraint against regular plurals in lexical compounds is operative in the same way as it is in unimpaired children. Van der Lely and Christian (2000) found a different pattern for a group of 16 older SLI children (mean age: 13; 11). Using the experimental task from Gordon (1985), they found that 35% of the correct regular plurals were maintained inside compounds and 47% of the correct irregulars, a difference that did not turn out to be significant. Note, however, that in contrast to what was found for the WS subjects, the SLI subjects studied by van der Lely and Christian omitted 90% of the overreg- ularized (i.e. productively formed) plurals (ﬁmouses) inside compounds. This is par- allel to the results of Oetting and Rice (1993) on SLI and to all available results on unimpaired children including van der Lely and Christian™s own control groups. That SLI children ban overregularized plurals from occurring inside compounds indicates that the ordering constraint is operative in English-speaking SLI children. The fact that van der Lely and Christian™s subjects sometimes maintained existing regulars in compounds could mean that SLI subjects have stored representations for some of the existing regulars, a suggestion that has independently been made by Gopnik (1994), Goad and Rebellati (1994) and Gopnik et al. (1996). This may also apply to the cases of existing regular plurals inside compounds reported by van der Lely and Christian. If so, the constraint would not be violated in such cases. Studies on plural formation and plurals-inside-compounds in German-speaking SLI children (Clahsen et al., 1992; Bartke, 1998) also show that the constraint against rule-based plurals in compounds is functioning in SLI children. Clahsen et al. (1992) examined spontaneous speech samples from 19 SLI children. In the 100 lex- ical compounds found in these samples, the regular plural affix -s (which is ungram- matical inside compounds in German) was always left out by the SLI children, while irregular plural affixes were often maintained inside compounds. In both respects, the SLI children™s compounds did not differ from those of adult German. Moreover, there was a significant correlation between the overregularization rates of particular affixes and the rates at which these affixes were omitted inside compounds. This is parallel to what was found for unimpaired children. Bartke (1998) investigated plural formation and compounding experimentally in 4 SLI children. She elicited 75 plural 750 H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 forms and corresponding lexical compounds in two elicited production tasks that were adapted to German from Gordon (1985). Bartke found that 73% of the regular plural affixes were omitted from compounds, whereas only 38% of the irregular plural forms were dropped inside compounds. These figures are similar to those from a control group of 8 unimpaired children who also underwent the two elicita- tion tasks. These results indicate that in contrast to what was found for WS subjects, the constraint against regular plurals does not seem to be affected in SLI children. 8.5. The grammatical characterization of WS Taken together, the profile of morpho-syntactic skills in WS appears to be quite different from that of SLI children. Whereas SLI children show difficulty and delays in core aspects of syntax (feature checking, A-chains, binding principles), WS sub- jects seem to be unimpaired on these phenomena.™ By contrast, the WS subjects were found to perform worse than the SLI children on irregular inflection and plu- rals inside compounds, phenomena that involve lexical exceptions or constraints. It is clear from the above that the grammatical profile of WS does not hold for SLI and vice versa. The further question, however, of whether the WS profile is unique to this syndrome or whether it may also be found in other kinds of neuro-developmen- tal disorders requires further comparative studies. As there are practically no studies investigating the morpho-syntactic skills of children with neuro-developmental dis- orders (see Tager-Flusberg (1999) for a recent review), this question will have to be left to future research. We suggest that the observed profile of morpho-syntactic skills in WS can be derived from a common source, a selective impairment in retrieving information from the lexicon. By contrast, the computational (rule-based) system of language appears to be unimpaired. Recall from Section 2 that irregularly inflected forms such as drove or mice are assumed to be stored in long-term memory, as subnodes to the corresponding basic lexical entries, e.g. drive and mouse respectively; see (1) and (2) for illustration. WS subjects, we argue, find it difficult to access phono- logical and/or morphological feature information represented on subnodes of lexi- cal entries. In contexts in which an irregular past tense or plural form is required and the WS child does not access the relevant subnode information, the basic lex- ical entry is still retrieved and a past tense or a plural is formed by applying inflec- tional rules (‚Add -ed™, ‚Add -s™), yielding overregularization errors. Thus, we do not claim that the lexical system as a whole is impaired in WS subjects. Accessing basic lexical entries does not cause problems, as can be seen from the fact that stem forms of regular verbs are almost always appropriate. Instead, WS subjects seem to have a more specific difficulty in retrieving subnode information in lexi- cal entries. I It should be acknowledged, however, that most of the evidence for this comes from older WS chil- dren, and that little is known about the morpho-syntactic abilities of 3- to 5-year-old WS children. It might therefore be possible that very young WS children may evidence difficulties or atypicalities not shown by older WS children. H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua Ill (2001) 729-757 751 It is important to note that in past tense and plural contexts, WS subjects do not leave verbs and nouns uninflected, but rather produce overregularization errors. This is different from SLI children who often produce bare stems, even in cases in which, for example, a past tense form is required; see Wexler™s (1994, 1998) optional infinitive account. Formal features such as tense and number are crucial parts of the syntactic representation, but the way they are spelled out is secondary. SLI children underspecify or omit formal features from their syntactic representation, producing optional infinitives. This is not the case for WS subjects. From a syntactic perspec- tive, the -ed and -s overregularizations WS subjects produce are low-level morpho- logical errors. Syntactically it does not matter much whether the tense feature in a clause is spelled out as drove or as drived or whether the number feature in a DP is spelled out as mice or as mouses. These considerations indicate that the syntactic representations of WS subjects (in contrast to those of SLI children) are fully speci- fied for formal features, and that the frequent overregularization errors result from a lexical difficulty, i.e. the retrieval of (subnode) information from lexical entries. To compensate for this difficulty, WS subjects make use of their computational knowl- edge, i.e. of inflectional rules. Consider, finally, plurals inside compounds. The three experiments we adminis- tered to the WS subjects have produced converging results indicating that the order- ing constraint which prohibits regular plurals inside lexical compounds in English has no effect on the WS subjects™ production and comprehension of plurals inside compounds. Instead, WS subjects seem to allow irregular as well as regular plural forms to appear inside compounds. This is in contrast to what has been found for SLI children and unimpaired children of different age groups including the youngest ones, i.e. 3-year-olds, to which these experiments could be administered. With respect to the WS subjects™ compound formations, recall that in adult Eng- lish the non-head element of a lexical compound can only be a listed form, i.e. a bare uninflected stem or an irregular plural form such as mice (given that irregulars form subnodes of lexical entries). A regular plural such as nails, however, is not a lexi- tally listed stem, and cannot appear inside a lexical compound. Hence, lexical com- pounding is restricted to stored items and may require access to subnode information from lexical entries (e.g. teeth in teeth marks). In the WS data, however, the non- head elements occurring inside compounds are not lexically constrained; instead, the WS subjects freely allow regular plurals inside compounds. It is important to note, however, that even though the WS subjects™ compound formations are unusual com- pared to what is known from unimpaired children, they are not ungrammatical. This is because English offers a second way of forming compounds, namely phrasal com- pounding, and the constraint against regular plurals does not hold for phrasal com- pounding. Any well-formed phrase (including a regular plural) can appear as the non-head element of a phrasal compound; this is how one might account for cases such as parks commissioner, buildings inspector, etc. (see Alegre and Gordon (1996) for discussion). Given the two options of forming compounds in English and the hypothesized lexical impairment, it is conceivable that the WS subjects take the lex- ically unrestricted option and form (phrase-based) compounds in the syntax. This would account for the fact that the WS subjects do not ban regular -s plurals from 752 H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 occurring inside compounds. This interpretation of the WS subjects™ unusual com- pounding behaviour also fits in with the results on the past tense and on plural inflec- tion, i.e. their frequent overregularization errors and their difficulties with irregular inflection. In both cases, an otherwise productive computational operation (e.g. -ed affixation, lexical compounding) is constrained or has exceptions in the adult lan- guage, and we found that it is these exceptions and constraints that cause difficulty for the WS subjects. 9. Conclusion Linguistic studies of Williams Syndrome help define a grammatical profile of this impairment, i.e. a precise characterization of the morpho-syntactic skills of WS sub- jects. The present set of findings on noun plurals and compounding together with the results of our previous study on passives, anaphoric binding and the past tense con- tribute towards a grammatical profile of English-speaking WS subjects. We found that the WS subjects do not show any syntactic impairments, and that they perform excellently on regular past tense and plural inflection. On the other hand, their scores on irregular past tense and plural forms are worse, lower than those of unimpaired controls. Moreover, the WS subjects were seen to use regular rules of inflection excessively, even in circumstances in which unimpaired children (and adults) would not use them, e.g. as non-head elements inside compounds. SLI presents us with a different pattern, in which core aspects of syntax such as feature checking, move- ment chains and binding principles seem to be impaired or severely delayed, whereas the use of stored (irregularly inflected) word forms and of plurals inside compounds does not cause any specific problems. We suggest that the WS subjects™ performance on the various linguistic tasks can be explained in terms of lexical problems, e.g. in accessing subnode information from lexical entries, without assuming any impairments of the computational rule- based component of language. This interpretation is compatible with findings on the lexical skills in WS. Temple et al. (2000) examined vocabulary levels and lexical access in the same group of WS subjects that we have studied. They found that the WS subjects had elevated levels of receptive vocabulary compared to their mental age, and generated significantly increased proportions of low frequency items in oral fluency tasks. Furthermore, the WS children were found to produce naming errors, many of which were atypical. Despite their anemic naming performance, the WS children responded faster in naming tasks than unimpaired controls. Temple et al. argued that the naming errors arise at the level of word selection during lexical access and can be attributed to fast but sloppy selection. Our finding that the WS subjects sometimes fail to retrieve irregular past tense and plural forms fits in with the view that ﬁchildren with WS have a lexical system where access is too fast and with insufficient editing of responsesﬂ (Temple et al., 2000: 27). At a more general level, these findings represent a challenge for associative mod- els of language according to which ﬁdistinctions between regular and exceptional (i.e. irregular) patterns of behavior can emerge through the operation of a single H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 153 mechanismﬂ (Elman et al., 1996: 131). Instead, the dissociation found between (unimpaired) computationally based operations and (impaired) memory-based retrieval of stored items provides evidence for the dual nature of the language fac- ulty, according to which these two systems are independent and therefore dissocia- ble (Pinker, 1999; Clahsen, 1999). We also found distinctive performance patterns for WS and SLI subjects that are hard to explain without making this distinction. Appendix: Items used in the experiments Experiment 1 _ Regulars: rat, baby, bead, hand, duck, toy, shirt, shoe, knife - Irregulars: mouse, man, tooth, foot, goose - Pluralia tantum nouns: clothes, trousers2, glasses, scissors Experiment 2 _ Regulars: elephant, apple, bottle, butterfly, banana, cat, onion, helicopter, bear, church, snake, flower, spider, mountain, glass - Inregulars: tooth, foot, mouse, woman, goose, child, man - Pluralia tantum nouns: trousers, glasses, scissors, clothes Experiment 3 Question number Pretest Red-blue Monster-rats Red-blue Monster-rats Brown-white cow-flowers Brown-white cow-flowers Pink-yellow Monster-spiders Pink-yellow Monster-spiders Red-white Fish-crabs Red-white Fish-crabs - - Question Can you point to the red rat eater? Can you point to the red rats eater? Can you point to the brown flower eater? Can you point to the brown flowers eater? Can you point to the pink spider eater? Can you point to the pink spiders eater? Can you point to the red crab eater? Can you point to the red crabs eater? ™ In the original experiment, Gordon (1985) employed the American English word pants; we substi- tuted it for the British English trousers. 754 H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 11 I (2001) 729-757 Items used in Experiment 3 (continued) - Question number 9 10 11 
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 Pretest Question White-brown Lion-birds White-brown Lion-birds Yellow-pink Monkey-bananas Yellow-pink Monkey-bananas Red-green parrot-spiders Red-green parrot-spiders Orange-green Monster-turtles Orange-green Monster-turtles Pink-brown Monster-cats Pink-brown Monster-cats Brown-pink Elephant-plants Brown-pink Elephant-plants Pink-green Gorilla-snake Pink-green Gorilla-snake Brown-black Camel-worms Brown-black Camel-worms Blue-red Whale-divers Blue-red Whale-divers Yellow-green Frog-flies Yellow-green Frog-flies Orange-pink Dog-flowers Orange-pink Dog-flowers Can you point to the brown bid eater? Can you point to the brown birds eater? Can you point to the yellow banana eater Can you point to the yellow bananas eater? Can you point to the green spider eater? Can you point to the green spiders eater? Can you point to the green turtle eater? Can you point to the green turtles eater? Can you point to the pink cat eater? Can you point to the pink cats eater? Can you point to the brown plant eater? Can you point to the brown plants eater? Can you point to the green snake eater? Can you point to the green snakes eater? Can you point to the brown worm eater? Can you point to the brown worms eater? Can you point to the blue diver eater? Can you point to the blue divers eater? Can you point to the green fly eater? Can you point to the green flies eater? Can you point to the orange flower eater? Can you point to the orange flowers eater? H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 155 References Alegre, M.A. and P. Gordon, 1996. Red rats eater exposes recursion in children™s word formation. Cog- nition 60, 65-82. Bartke, S., 1998. Experimentelle Studien zur Flexion und Wortbildung. Pluralbildung und lexikalische Komposition im unauffalligen Sprachetwerb und im Dysgrammatismus. Tubingen. Niemeyer. Bates, L. and Camevale, G., 1993. New directions in research on language development. Developmen- tal Reviews 13,436-470. Bellugi, U., A. Bihrle, T. Jemigan, D. Trauner and S. Doherty, 1990. Neuropsychological, neurological, and neuroanatomical profile of Williams Syndrome. American Journal of Medical Genetics Supple- ment 6, 115-125. Bellugi, U., S. Marks, A. Bihrle and H. Sabo, 1988. Dissociation between language and cognitive func- tions in Williams Syndrome. In: D. Bishop and K. Mogford teds.), Language development in excep- tional circumstances, 177-189. London: Churchill Livingstone. Bellugi, U., Wang, P. and T. Jemigan, 1994. Williams Syndrome: An unusual neuropsychological pro- file. In: S. Broman and J. Grafman (eds.), Atypical cognitive deficits in developmental disorders. Implications for brain function, 23-56. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. Bishop, D., 1983. Test for reception of grammar. London: Medical Research Council. Borer, H., 1988. On the parallelism between compounds and constructs. Yearbook of Morphology 1, 4566. Bromberg, H., M. Ullman, G. Marcus, K. Kelly and M. Coppola, 1994. A dissociation of memory and grammar: evidence from Williams Syndrome. Paper presented at the Eighteenth Annual Boston Uni- versity Conference on Language Development. Capirci, O., L. Sabbadini and V. Volterra, 1996. Language development in Williams Syndrome: A case study. Cognitive Neuropsychology 13(7), 1017-1039. Chapman, C., A. du Plessis and B. Pober, 1995. Neurologic findings in children and adults with Williams Syndrome. Journal of Child Neurology 11, 6365. Chomsky, N., 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Christian, V., 1997. Plural formation and compound formation in grammatical specific language impaired and normally developing children. Unpublished manuscript, Birkbeck College, London. Churchland, P., 1995. The engine of reason, the seat of the soul: A philosophical journey into the brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Clahsen, H., 1999. Lexical entries and rules of language: A multi-disciplinary study of German inflec- tion. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22(6), 991-1013. Clahsen , H. and M. Almazan, 1998. Syntax and morphology in Williams Syndrome. Cognition 68, 167-198. Clahsen, H., G. Marcus, S. Bartke and R. Wiese, 1996. Compounding and inflection in German child language. Yearbook of Morphology 1995, 115-142. Clahsen, H., M. Rothweiler, A. Woest and G. Marcus, 1992. Regular and irregular inflection in the acquisition of German noun plurals. Cognition 45, 225-255. Di Sciullo, A.-M. and E. Williams, 1987. On the definition of word. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Dunn, L.M., C. Whetton and D. Pintilie, 1982. British Picture Vocabulary Scale. Windsor: NFER-NEL- SON. Elman, J., 1993. Learning and development in neural networks: The importance of starting small. Cog- nition 48,71-99. Elman, J., L. Bates, M. Johnson, A. Karmiloff-Smith, D. Parisi and K. Plunkett, 1996. Rethinking innateness. A connectionist perspective on development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Ewart, A., C. Morris, D. Atkinson, J. Weishan, K. Stemes, P. Spallone, A. Stock, M. Leppert and M. Keating, 1993. Hemizygosity at the elastin gene locus in a developmental disorder, Williams Syn- drome. Nature Genetics 5, 11-16. Fodor, J., 1983. The modularity of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Frangiskakis, J.M., A.K. Ewart, C.A. Morris, C.B. Mervis, J. Bertrand, B.F. Robinson, B.P. Klein, G.J. Ensing, L.A. Everett, E.D. Green, C. Proschel, N.J. Gutowski, M. Noble, D.L. Atkinson, S.J. Odel- 756 H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua Ill (2001) 729-757 berg and M.T. Keating, 1996. LIM-kinasel hemizygosity implicated in impaired visuospatial con- structive cognition. Cell 86, 59-69. Goad, H. and C. Rebellati, 1994. Pluralization in familial language impairment. McGill Working Papers in Linguistics 10, 24-40. Gopnik, M., 1994. Impairments of tense in a familial language disorder. Journal of Neurolinguistics 8, 109-133. Gopnik, M., J. Dalalakis, SE. Fukuda, S. Fukuda and E. Kehayia, 1996. Genetic language impairment: Umuly grammars. Proceedings of the British Academy 88,223-249. Gopnik, M. and H. Goad, 1997. What underlies inflectional patterns in genetic dysphasia. Journal of Neurolinguistics 10, 109-137. Gordon, P., 1985. Level-ordering in lexical development. Cognition 21, 73-93. Greenberg, F., 1990. Introduction. American Journal of Medical Genetics Supplement 6, 85-88. Hovis, C. and M. Butler, 1997. Photoantropometric study of craniofacial traits in individuals with Williams Syndrome. Clinical Genetics 51, 379-387. Karmiloff-Smith, A., J. Grant, I. Berthoud, M. Davies, P. Howlin and 0. Udwin, 1997. Language and Williams Syndrome: How intact is ‚intact™?. Child Development 68, 274-290. Kiparsky, P., 1982. From cyclic phonology to lexical phonology. In: H. van der Hulst and N. Smith (eds.), The structure of phonological representations (Part I), 131-175. Dordrecht: Foris. Krause, M. and M. Pet&e, 2000. Inflectional morphology in German Williams Syndrome. Unpublished manuscript, University of Duesseldorf. Levy, Y. and G. Kaht, 1999. Language breakdown and linguistic theory: A tutorial overview. Lingua 107,95-143. Lieber, R., 1992. Deconstructing morphology. Word formation in syntactic theory. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press. Marcus, G.F., S. Pinker, M. Ulhnan, M. Hollander, T. Rosen and F. Xu, 1992. Overregularization in lan- guage acquisition. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development 57 (Serial No. 228). Mervis, C., C. Morris, J. Bertrand and B. Robinson, 1999. Williams Syndrome: findings from an inte- grated research program. In: H. Tager-Flusberg (ed.), Neurodevelopmental disorders, 65-110. Cam- bridge, MA: MIT Press. Nakisa, R., K. Plunkett and U. Hahn, 2000. A cross-linguistic comparison of single and dual-route mod- els of inflectional morphology. In: P. Broeder and J. Murre (eds.), Cognitive models of language acquisition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Oetting, J. and J. Horohov, 1997. Past tense marking by children with and without specific language impairment. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 40,62-74. Oetting, J. and M. Rice, 1993. Plural acquisition in children with specific language impairment. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 36, 12361248. Pinker, S., 1999. Words and rules: The ingredients of language. New York: Basic Books. Plunkett, K. and V. Marchman, 1996. Learning from a connectionist model of the English past tense. Cognition 61,299-308. Plunkett, K. and R. Nakisa, 1997. A connectionist model of the Arabic plural system. Language and Cognitive Processes 12, 807-836. Rice, M., C. Mervis, B. Klein and K. Rice, 1999. Children with Williams Syndrome do not show an EOI stage. Paper presented at 24th Boston University Conference on Language Development, November 1999. Rice, M. and J. Oetting, 1993. Morphological deficits of children with SLI: Evaluation of number mark- ing and agreement. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 36, 1254-1262. Rice, M., K. Wexler and P. Cleave, 1995. Specific language impairment as a period of extended optional infinitive. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 38, 850-863. Rumelhart, D. and J. McClelland, 1986. On learning the past tenses of English verbs. In: J. McClelland, D. Rumelhart, and the PDP Research Group (eds.), Parallel Distributed Processing, Vol. 2, 216-271. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Seidenberg, M., 1997. Language acquisition and use: Learning and applying probabilistic constraints. Science 275, 1599-1603. H. Clahsen and M. Almazan I Lingua 111 (2001) 729-757 751 Sproat, R. 1985.On deriving the lexicon. Doctoral dissertation, MIT. Tager-Flusberg, H., (ed.) 1999. Neurodevelopmental disorders. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Temple, C., M. Almazan-Hamilton, F. Waters and S. Sherwood., 2000. Lexical skills in Williams Syn- drome: A cognitive neuropsychological analysis. Unpublished manuscript. University of Essex. Tyler, L., A. Karmiloff-Smith, J.K. Voice, T. Stevens, 3. Grant, 0. Udwin, M. Davies and P. Howlin, 1997. Do individuals with Williams Syndrome have bizarre semantics? Evidence for lexical organi- zation using an on-line task. Cortex 33, 515-521. van der Lely, H., 1996. Specifically language impaired and normally developing children: Verbal pas- sive vs. adjectival passive sentence interpretation. Lingua 98, 243-272. van der Lely, H. and V. Christian, 2000. Lexical word formation in children with grammatical SLI: A grammar-specific versus an input-processing deficit? Cognition 75, 33-63. van der Lely, H., 1998. SLI in children: Movement, economy, and deficits in the computational-syntac- tic system. Language Acquisition 7, 161-192. van der Lely, H. and L. Stollwerck, 1997. Binding theory and specifically language impaired children. Cognition 62, 245-290. van der Lely, H. and M. Ullman, 1998. Past tense morphology in specifically language impaired and nor- mally developing children. Unpublished manuscript. Volterra, V., 0. Capirci, G. Pezzini, L. Sabbadini and S. Vicari, 1996. Linguistic abilities in Italian chil- dren with Williams Syndrome. Cortex 32, 663-677. Wang, P. and U. Bellugi, 1994. Evidence from two genetic syndromes for a dissociation between verbal and visual-spatial short-term memory. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology 16, 3 17-322. Wechsler, D., 1992. Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children. Third edition UK. Sidcup, Kent: The Psy- chological Corporation. Wexler, K., 1994. Optional infinitives, head movement and the economy of derivations in child gram- mar. In: D. Lightfoot and N. Homstein (eds.), Verb movement, 305-350. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Wexler, K., 1998. Very early parameter setting and the unique checking constraint: A new explanation of the optional infinitive stage. Lingua 106, 23-79. Wiese, R. 1996. Phrasal compounds and the theory of word syntax. Linguistic Inquiry 27, 183-193. 