ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 www.eIsevier.com/Iocate/lingua Concealed pseudo-clefts* Ileana Paul* MITIUQAM, Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, MIT, E39-245, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA Received 1 September 2000; revised version 18 October 2000 Abstract This paper argues for a pseudo-cleft analysis of so-called clefts in Malagasy. Evidence is presented that the clefted element is in fact the matrix (cop&u) predicate and that the pre- suppositional clause is a headless relative in subject position. The proposed pseudo-cleft structure accounts for the focus interpretation of this construction, due to the underlying pres- ence of a definite description in the subject position. 0 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Clefts; Pseudo-clefts; Focus; Malagasy 1. Introduction The goal of this paper is two-fold. First, I argue that the cleft in Malagasy, a west- em Austronesian language, is best analyzed as a (kind of) pseudo-cleft.™ More pre- cisely, clefts are copular constructions with a headless relative in subject position. Second, I show that the special focus interpretation associated with these clefts I would like to thank Saholy Hanitriniaina for her Malagasy judgements. I have greatly benefited from comments from the audiences at the Chicago Linguistics Society and the Austronesian Formal Lin- guistics Association as well from a Lingua reviewer. Any errors remain my own responsibility. * Phone: +I (617) 629-0388; E-mail: iIeana@mit.edu ™ I am using the term ‚pseudo-cleft™ somewhat liberally here. Since Higgins (1979), pseudo-clefts in English are defined as having a free relative in subject position: (i) What Sahondra did was cut the tree. In the languages discussed in this paper, the subject is either a headless relative or a free relative. I do not take this difference to be important for present purposes. 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter 0 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved PII: SOO24-3841(00)00044-9 708 I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 derives quite simply from the semantics of the headless relative (a definite descrip- tion). (1) illustrates a typical example from Malagasy (VOS).2 (1) [I Sahondra] [no nanapaka ity hazo ity 1. Sahondra DET PST.AT.cut this tree this ‚It was Sahondra who cut this tree.™ (lit.) ‚The one who cut this tree was Sahondra.™ The focussed element, i Sahondru, is the matrix (copular) predicate. The clause-final subject is the headless relative IZO nanupaku ity haze ity ‚the one who cut this tree™.™ In the literature on clefts, there are two main approaches, that I will label ‚move- ment™ and ‚non-movement™. The former is exemplified by Chomsky (1977) and Rizzi (1997) (for English and Italian, respectively). Chomsky proposes that the clefted element is adjoined to CP and operator movement obtains to [Spec, CP] to account for the A-bar properties of clefting. The following bracketed structure illus- trates how the Chomsky analysis might represent the Malagasy cleft in (1). (2) [cp I Sahondra, [cp Opi [ip . . . vbli . ..I]] Rizzi (1997), on the other hand, argues for a separate functional projection, FocusP, that hosts focussed elements in its specifier. Hence the structure of (1) could be as in (3). (3) [rocusP I Sahondrai . . . [ip . . . ti . ..I] Under both ‚movement™ accounts, the focussed element appears in the CP layer of the clause. The ‚non-movement™ analyses exploit connections between clefts and pseudo- clefts, beginning with observations about English by Jespersen (1928). Much research in the 60s and 70s explored these connections (e.g. Akmajian, 1970; Pinkham and Hankamer, 1975). More recently, Percus (1996) has proposed that cleft sentences in English be derived from a structure with a headless relative in subject ? Proper names in Malagasy are preceded with a determiner, either i or Ra. Abbreviations used in this paper : 1 -first person 2-second person 3-third person Ace-accusative AcK-agreement AT-Actor Topic AV-Actor Voice CT-Circumstantial Topic DET-determiner DO-direct object EQ-equative Exct,-exclamative particle FOC-fOCUS FUT-fUtLUe CEN-genitive L-locative LNK-linker NEG-negation Nohl-nominative NPI-negative polarity item P-preposition PASS-passive PeKF-perfective FL-plural PST-past Q-question marker R-referential Knr.-relative marker SC-singular T/A-tense/aspect TOP-topic particle ‚IT- Theme Topic Malagasy grapheme to phoneme correspondence is fairly transparent, with one notable (and in this paper, important) exception: o is pronounced [u]. 3 Although I argue that the correct analysis of Malagasy ‚clefts™ involves a pseudo-cleft, I will gener- ally translate with cleft sentences as they are more natural in English. I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 709 position. For these researchers, the focussed element is in fact a predicate and appears in its base position. Whether or not these researchers are correct about Eng- lish, I will show that their arguments apply very elegantly to the Malagasy data. That clefts are in fact pseudo-clefts in some Austronesian languages is not a new claim. Other researchers have come to the same conclusion about Chamorro (Chung, 1998), Madurese (Davies, 2OOO), Malay (Cole et al., to appear (henceforth WA)), Maori (Bauer, 1991), Palauan (Georgopoulos, 1991) and Tagalog (Kroeger, 1993; Richards, 1998): What has not been previously noted is the connection between the syntactic structure and interpretation. This paper does not make any claims about the universality of the proposed analysis of clefts. In fact, both a movement analysis and a pseudo-cleft analysis may be possible (as is argued for English by Pinkham and Hankamer, 1975 and for Chamorro by Chung, 1998). This paper, however, only motivates the pseudo- cleft analysis, based on structural and interpretive arguments. In other words, I leave open the possibility that some clefts may indeed be generated via move- ment. 2. Structure Since the bulk of the data in the paper are from Malagasy, I give a brief introduc- tion to Malagasy syntax. The unmarked (and fairly rigid) word order is VOS, as illustrated in (4), where the subject is marked with a dotted underline. (4) a. Nanapaka ity hazo ity tamin™ny antsy i Sahondra. PsT.AT.cut this tree this PST.~.GEN.DET knife Sahondra ‚Sahondra cut this tree with the knife.™ b. Notapahin™i Sahondra tamin™ny antsy ity hazo ity. PST.TT.CUt.GEN.SahOndra PST.P.GEN.DET knife this tree this ‚This tree was cut by Sahondra with the knife.™ c. Nanapahan™i Sahondra ity hazo ity ny antsy. PST.CT.CUt.GEN.SahOndra this tree this DET knife ‚The knife was used by Sahondra to cut the tree.™ (4) also illustrates the basic voice alternations: Actor Topic (AT), Theme Topic (IT) and Circumstantial Topic (CT). Simplifying somewhat, the different voices promote different elements to subject: agents, themes and obliques, respectively. Similar voice paradigms may be found in other Austronesian languages, with varying degrees of complexity. The core data I will consider in this paper are clefts, as in (l), repeated in (5). 4 The pseudo-cleft analysis of Malagasy is suggested by Pearson (1996: fn17) and argued for in more detail by Paul (2000). 710 I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 (5) I Sahondra no nanapaka ity hazo ity. Sahondra DET PST.AT.cut this tree this ‚It was Sahondra who cut this tree.™ On the surface, (5) involves the ‚fronting™ of the subject, which is followed by the particle IZO. In Malagasy, as in most western Austronesian languages, only subjects and (certain) obliques may be focussed (Keenan, 1972). In order to focus an internal argument, Theme Topic is used. This restriction is shown by the contrast between the ungrammatical (6a) and the grammatical (6b). (6) a. *Ity hazo ity no nanapaka i Sahondra. this tree this DET PST.AT.cut Sahondra ‚It was this tree that Sahondra cut.™ b. Ity hazo ity no notapahin™i Sahondra. this tree this DET PST.TT.CUt.GEN.Sahondra ‚It was this tree that was cut by Sahondra.™ Adjuncts, however, freely cleft, whatever the voice on the verb, AT, IT, or CT. (7) a. Tamin™ny antsy no nanapaka ity hazo ity i Sahondra. PST.P.GEN.DET knife DET PsT.AT.cut this tree this Sahondra ‚It was with the knife that Sahondra cut this tree.™ b. Tamin™ny antsy no notapahin™i Sahondra ity hazo ity. PST.P.GEN.DET knife DET PsT.TT.cut.GEN.Sahondra this tree this ‚It was with the knife that this tree was cut by Sahondra.™ c. Tamin™ny antsy no nanapahan™i Sahondra ity hazo ity. PST.P.GEN.DET knife DET PST.CT.cut.GEN.Sahondra this tree this ‚It was with the knife that Sahondra cut this tree.™ Note that in (7c), the adjunct is first promoted to subject and then clefted. I will not provide an explicit analysis of the extraction restriction (which applies to all instances of A-bar movement as well as raising in general) in this paper (but see Sec- tion 2.3 for some discussion of the ungrammaticality of (6a)). Instead, I focus on the structure and interpretation of clefts. As already seen above, typical examples of clefts involve NPs and PPs. In certain cases, apparent VP clefts occur. (8) [v,Mihinana akoho ] no mitsangana Rasoa. AT.eat chicken DET AT.stand Rasoa ‚It is while eating chicken that Rasoa stands.™ In (8), the VP mihinana akoho ‚eating chicken™ acts like a adverbial modifier. The exact categorial status is therefore unclear. Examples of clefts similar to the Malagasy example in (1) can be found in Chamorro, Madurese, Malay, Maori, Palauan and Tagalog: (9) a. b. C. d. e. f. I. Paul I Lingua I11 (2001) 707-727 Pka si Jessie p&a u-fina™gasi i kareta PUT Jessie FUT AGR-PASS.WaSh the car ‚It will be Jessie by whom the car will be washed.™ Siti se entar daq Jakarta. Siti REL go to Jakarta ‚It™s Siti who went to Jakarta.™ Apa yang Ali beli? what that Ali buy ‚What did Ali buy? ™ Ko Hone i kite i te taahae. EQ John see DO the thief ‚It was John who saw the thief.™ Ng-Basilia a mengaus er tia el tet. AGR-BaSilia R-weave P DEM L bag ‚It™s Basilia who™s weaving this bag.™ Si Bing ang gumawa ng sapatos na NOM Bing NOM AV.PERF.make GEN shoe LNK ‚It was Bing who made those shoes.™ 711 [Chamorro] (Chung, 1998) [Madurese] (Davies, 2000) [MaWI VW [Maori] (Bauer, 1991) [Palauan] (Georgopoulos, 199 1) iyon [Tagalogl that (Kroeger, 1993) In all cases, the focussed element appears clause-initially. It would be tempting to analyze these data as involving movement to the specifier position of a focus projection, as in (2) and (3) above. I argue, however, that in Malagasy the ‚cleft™ in is in fact a pseudo-cleft. The basic structure is given in (lob). The focussed element is an XP predicate and the presuppositional clause is a head- less relative in subject position.ﬂ (10) a. I Sahondra no nanapaka ity hazo ity. Sahondra DET PST.AT.cut this tree this (lit.) ‚The one who cut this tree was Sahondra.™ b. IP XP DP 0 CP I Sahondra no nanapaka ity hazo ity 5 For the purposes of this paper, I assume the simple clause structure in (lob), which is based on the analysis in Guilfoyle et al. (1992). Other analyses of V-initial word order involve some kind of predicate fronting (e.g. Vﬂ or VP movement to a specifier position), but the differences are not crucial to the story presented here. Of the languages discussed, Madurese and Malay are not predicate-initial. Therefore, clefting does involve movement of the predicate to some clause-initial position. I discuss the structural differences between clefts in predicate-initial languages and SVO languages in Section 2.1. 712 I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 I first show that the focussed element patterns with predicates. I then turn to the pre- suppositional clause and provide arguments for a headless relative clause in subject position. Though this paper is essentially concerned with the structure of the Mala- gasy cleft, I will compare with data from the languages cited above, which have all been argued to have clefts with the structure in (lob). The status of the ‚focus particle™, no, is less easy to determine (see the discussion in section 2.2.4). Many other Austronesian languages have a relative marker similar in form to the Malagasy no (either nu or anu). For example, in Sundanese, an Indonesian language, the relative clause marker is nu (Hardjadibrata, 1985). It is therefore possible that the Malagasy 110 is a Cﬂ, a historical remnant. Malzac (1960) mentions that certain Malagasy grammarians believe IZO to be diachronically related to the determiner ny. He does not provide any references, however. The two trees in (11) illustrate two possible structures for the headless relative in question.‚j Under these analyses, no is either a determiner, as in (1 la), or a complementizer, as in (1 lb). (11) a. b. /% ‚L?LL. /ﬁ‚-\, /Y Dﬂ NP OP...vbl Dﬂ NP OP ,/\ I I I I COL1 no 0 @ 0 I vbl no For clarity, I will gloss no as a determiner, leaving for future research to determine which of the above structures are correct for Malagasy. 2.1. Focus = predicate In the above cited languages, the focussed XP does have predicate-like properties. As a first observation, Malagasy is verb-initial. The null hypothesis is therefore that the clause-initial focus is a predicate. There are also language-specific arguments that support this analysis. For example, in Chamorro, the focus can be immediately preceded by a tense/aspect/mood particle (see (9a)). The Palauan example in (9e) shows that the focus takes the subject agreement marker ng. Thus in these languages, verbal markers such as agreement and tense associate with the focussed element. In Malay the interrogative focus particle kah provides evidence for the predicate status of focus (Kader, 1976). Simplifying somewhat, kah can appear on elements in the predicate, but not on the subject (boldface indicates focus). h The two structures in (11) may be relevant to the unaddressed question as to whether or not these DPs are true free relatives (as in English pseudo-clefts) or headless relatives as assumed here. 1. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 713 (12) a. Fatimah kata Siti membeli buku itukab semalam? Fatimah say Siti bought book that-Q yesterday ‚Did Fatimah say that Siti bought that book yesterday?™ (CHA: 40) b. *Fatimah kata Sitikah membeli buku itu semalam? Fatimah say Siti-Q bought book that yesterday (CHA:41) If the clefted element is indeed a predicate, we expect kah to be able to appear, as the data in (13) show to be the case. Crucially, (13b) is grammatical even though the wh word corresponds to the subject of the clause. (13) a. Apakab yang Ali beli? what-Q that Ali buy ‚What did Ali buy? ™ b. Siapakab yang datang? who-Q that came ‚Who came? ™ (CHA: 46) (WA: 47) The grammaticality of kuh on the clefted word is evidence that the focussed element originates in predicate position, rather than subject position. Similar data can be found in Madurese (Davies, 2000). The emphatic particle jhoh can appear in the predicate, as shown by the examples below. (14) a. Ali a-barriq jhoh buku jhuwa daq Siti! Ali Av-give EMPH book that to Siti ‚Ali gave the book to Siti ! ™ b. Ali a-barriq buku jhuwa daq Siti jhoh! Ali Av-give book that to Siti EMPH ‚Ali gave the book to Siti!™ If the emphatic particle appears on the subject, however, the subject must be in the clefted position. (15) Ali jhoh *(se) a-barriq buku jhuwa daq Siti! Ali emph REL Av-give book that to Siti ‚Ali is the one who gave the book to Siti! ™ Since (15) is ungrammatical without the focus marker, subjects (unlike VP-internal material) cannot take the emphatic particle. If the subject is clefted, however, and therefore the matrix predicate, the emphatic particle is permitted. Just as in Malay, the clefted element in Madurese patterns with predicates. Turning now to Malagasy, most pivots are DPs or PPs, which are also possible as matrix predicates. (16) a. Any Antananarivo no mipetraka i Ketaka. there Antananarivo DET Ar.live Ketaka ‚It™s in Antananarivo that Ketaka lives.™ 714 I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 b. Any Antananarivo i Ketaka. there Antananarivo Ketaka ‚Ketaka is in Antananarivo.™ (16a) shows a clefted PP and (16b) a PP as a matrix predicate. Consider the parallel DP examples below.7 (17) a. Mpianatra no mamaky teny. student DET AT.read word ‚It™s students who are reading.™ b. Mpianatra i Ketaka. student Ketaka ‚Ketaka is a student.™ The data in (16) and (17) show that the elements that occur in the clefted position can function independently as predicates. Moreover, a clefted DP can be negated, unlike argument DPs and like predicates (verbal or other). Thus the pivot in (18a), Rasoa, can take negation (marked by tsy) and patterns with the nominal predicate in (18d), mpianatra ‚student™. (18b,c) show that as arguments, DPs cannot be negated. (18) a. Tsy Rasoa no nanoroka an-dRakot0. NEG Rasoa DET PST.AT.kiss Act-Rakoto ‚It™s not Rasoa who kissed Rakoto.™ b. *Nanoroka tsy an-dRakoto Rasoa. PST.AT.kiss NEG Act-Rakoto Rasoa c. * Nanoroka an-dRakoto tsy Rasoa. PST.AT.kiss Act-Rakoto NEG Rasoa d. Tsy mpianatra Rasoa. NEG student Rasoa ‚Rasoa is not a student.™ Similarly, the pivot may be preceded by the verbal particle toa ‚seems™. As shown in (19a), toa normally precedes the predicate.8 ™ With DPs, there arises a difference between simple predicates and clefts. Standard DP predicates can- not be definite, while definite DPs can clearly cleft. Hence the examples in (i) below contrast with (17). (i) a. Ny mpianatra no mamaky teny. DET student DET AT.read word ‚It™s the students who are reading.™ b. *Ny mpianatra i Ketaka. DET student Ketaka ‚Ketaka is the student.™ This difference clearly requires some explanation. To do so, however, would involve a complete discus- sion of nominal predication in Malagasy, a topic which deserves further research but is beyond the scope of the present paper. s Other adverbs that pattern with toa ‚seems™ are tena ‚really™ and tokony ‚should™. (19) a. b. I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 Toa nanoroka an-dRakoto Rasoa. seem PST.AT.~~SS Xc-Rakoto Rasoa ‚Rasoa seems to have kissed Rakoto.™ Toa Rasoa no nanoroka an-dRakoto. seem Rasoa DET PST.AT.kiSS Xc-Rakoto ‚It seems to be Rasoa who kissed Rakoto.™ 715 The above data indicate that the pivot has a similar distribution to predicates.9 Summing up, a range of data show that the focussed element in a cleft patterns with predicates. I take this as evidence in favour of the structure in (lob), where the focus appears in the matrix predicate position. Recall that treating the focus as a predicate is consistent with the predicate-initial word order of Malagasy and other languages mentioned above. The only exceptions are Madurese and Malay, which are SVO. In order to account for the SVO languages, one could stipulate that in these cases, focus movement obtains. In other words, the focus element is generated in a predicate position and then moves to the specifier of a functional projection that dominates the subject position. An analysis along these lines is proposed in CHA. (20) FP DP A Iﬂ XP Note that this movement may be due to theme-rheme considerations and I claim is not required in a verb-initial language such as Malagasy. 9 Note that in clefts, there are two potential positions for both tsy and toa: preceding the focused ele- ment or preceding the embedded verb (with a clear difference in interpretation). Compare (ia) with (18a) and (ib) with (19b). (i) a. Rasoa no tsy nanoroka an-dRakoto. Rasoa DET NEG PST.AT.kiss Act-Rakoto ‚It was Rasoa who didn™t kiss Rakoto.™ b. Rasoa no toa nanoroka an-dRakot0. Rasoa DET seem PST.AT.~~SS Act-Rakoto ‚It was Rasoa who seemed to kiss Rakoto.™ Hence it is not simply the case that tsy and toa are clause-initial particles. 716 I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 2.2. Presuppositional clause = headless relative Let us now examine the presuppositional clause in more detail. In (lob), the pre- suppositional clause has the structure of a headless relative. As discussed in the fol- lowing sub-sections, the cleft marker in the Austronesian languages cited above is a relative clause marker or another nominal marker. 2.2.1. Malay The data below illustrate the identity between the relative marker and the cleft marker in Malay. (21) a. Siapa yang kau nampak? who that you see ‚Who do you see?™ b. Yang kau nampak Siti (-lah). that you see Siti (foe) ‚The one you see is Siti.™ c. [,,buku [cP yang John beli ]] book that John bought ‚the book that John bought™ (CHA: 36) (CHA: 23) (CHA: 33) (20a) is a clefted question, marked by yang (glossed as ‚that™). (21b) illustrates yang as a headless relative marker. That yang can be used for regular (headed) relative clauses is shown in (21~). Thus the yang in clefts marks the presence of a headless relative in subject position. Davies (2000) cites parallel data from Madurese, which uses the relative/focus marker se (see (9b)). 2.2.2. Palauan In Palauan, the morpheme a is an all-purpose DP marker and precedes the pre- suppositional clause in a cleft. The data in (22) are from Georgopoulos (1991). (22a) illustrates the standard predicate-initial word order while (22b,c) are clefts. Note the presence of a in all examples. (22) a. [rredicate Ng-mekelekolt] [subject a ralm I. AGR-cold R-water ‚The water is cold.™ b. [predicate Ng-Basilia] [subject a mengaus er tia el tet 1. AGR-Basilia R-weave P DEM L bag ‚It™s Basilia who™s weaving this bag.™ C. [predicate Ng-te™a] [subject a kileld-ii a sub ]? AGR-who R-PERF-heat-3s soup ‚Who heated up the soup? ™ As described by Georgopoulos, a always occurs before a DP (but not before names, pronouns or demonstratives). She concludes that since the presuppositional clause in (22b,c) is marked with a, it is a nominal in the subject position. I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 717 2.2.3. Tagalog Richards (1998) cites the following data in favour of a pseudo-cleft structure for Tagalog clefts. He points out that ang usually marks nominals in topic position, as in (23a), where lalaki ‚man™ has been topicalized. (Richards calls ‚topic™ what I refer to as the subject position.) Clefts, on the other hand, obligatorily involve ang placed immediately before the verb, as illustrated in (23b). (23) a. Bumili ang lalaki ng tela. AT.buy T man GEN cloth ‚The man bought cloth.™ b. Sino ang bumili ng tela. who T AT.buy GEN cloth ‚Who bought cloth? ™ The distribution of ang is explained if the string of words following the clefted ele- ment (sino ‚who™ in (23b)) is a headless relative in topic (subject) position. 2.2.4. Malagasy The Malagasy ‚focus marker™ no is somewhat mysterious by comparison with the above languages as it is not used elsewhere in the language.‚O Hence this type of headless relative does not surface except in clefts. Free relatives in argument posi- tions use izay, as illustrated in (24a). Headed relative clauses, such as in (24b), are also marked with izay (although it is often optional). (24) a. Hahazo karama be izay miasa mafy. FUT.AT.get Salary big REL AT.work hard ‚Whoever works hard will make lots of money.™ b. ny vehivavy (izay) miasa mafy DET woman (REL) AT.WOrk hard ‚the woman who works hard™ Other headless relatives are marked with the determiner ny. lo Clearly unrelated is the past tense marker no. Another use of no, likely related to the focus con- struction is in the first clause of an if.. then statement, when the second clause expresses a cause. (i) Izaho no tsy tonga, nisy raharaha nalehako. lSg(NOM) DET NEG arrive PST.AT.eXiSt business PST.a.gOne.lSg(GEN) ‚If I didn™t come, it™s because business called me elsewhere.™ Finally, no appears in certain SVO contexts, where the subject is an indefinite pronoun. (ii) Na iza na iza (no) tsy mamafa lalana dia voasazy. or who or who (DET) NEG ATsweep road top voa.punish ‚Whoever doesn™t sweep the road will be punished.™ In (ii), no is optional and in fact some speakers prefer to omit it. In regular clefts, no is obligatorily present. 718 I. Paul I Lingua III (2001) 707-727 (25) try miasa mafy DET AT.work hard ‚the ones who are working hard™ or ‚the event of working hard™ I simply stipulate that the headless relative marked by IZO is restricted to the subject position of certain copular clauses. Note that the headless relatives in other lan- guages do not seem to have this restriction and may appear in any argument position. Coordination in Malagasy points toward a DP structure for the presuppositional clause. More precisely, it is evidence against treating the cleft construction as fronting to a specifier position of a functional category in the CP layer of the clause (a la Rizzi, 1997). Under such an analysis, the focus constituent moves to the speci- fier position of [FocusP] and no is the head of FocusP or some other projection. The remainder of the clause is simply material in IP. This structure is shown in (26). (26) [FocusP Rasoai [ no [ir nijinja vary 4 II* Rasoa DET PsT.AT.harvest iiCe ‚It was Rasoa who was harvesting rice.™ Consider now coordination. Malagasy has two main types of coordinating conjunc- tion: ary and sy. The former conjoins clauses (IP or CP), while the latter is for smaller constituents, for example VP or DP (or heads). (27) a. Miteny ny mpampianatra at-y mihaino ny mpianatra. AT.speak DET teacher and AT.listen DET student ‚The teacher speaks and the students listen.™ b. Misotro sy miloka izy. AT.drink and AT.play 3(NOM) ‚He drinks and plays.™ Crucially, sy (and not ary) is used to coordinate presuppositional clauses. (28) Rasoa [no nijinja vary] sy/*ary [ no nanapaka bozaka] . Rasoa DET PST.AT.harveSt rice and DET PST.AT.CUt grass ‚It was Rasoa who harvested rice and cut grass.™ First, the datum in (28) indicates that the string of no and whatever follows (i.e. the presuppositional clause) is a constituent. Second, (28) shows that the presupposi- tional clause is not IP or CP since ary is ungrammatical. Clearly, IZO cannot be a head high in the CP domain. Thus we have evidence against the analysis briefly sketched in (26). Due to the similarities between clefts and relative constructions, I will con- clude that no is a complex nominal marker (either a Dﬂ or a Cﬂ as discussed at the beginning of Section 2). I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 719 2.3. Headless relatives In this section, I address certain aspects of the interpretation of the headless rela- tive clause in the proposed structure of the cleft. In a cleft where the pivot corre- sponds to the subject, the headless relative means something like ‚the one/thing who/that . . . ™ . (29) a. I Bakoly no manapaka bozaka. Bakoly DET AT.CUt grass (lit.) ‚The one who is cutting grass is Bakoly.™ b. Bozaka no tapahin™i Bakoly. grass DET -lT.cut.GEN.Bakoly (lit.) ‚The thing that Bakoly is cutting is grass.™ c. Ny antsy no anapahin™i Bakoly bozaka. DET knife DET CT.cut.GEN.Bakoly grass (lit.) ‚The thing that Bakoly is cutting grass with is the knife.™ The voice on the verb will determine which argument is interpreted as the external argument. An agent with AT, as in (29a), a theme with TT, as in (29b), or some oblique with CT, as in (29~). Recall the restrictions on clefting mentioned at the beginning of Section 2. The absence of object clefts is a direct consequence of the headless relative structure pro- posed. It is not possible to relativize an object, hence the corresponding object cleft is impossible. In other words, the ungrammaticality of the cleft (30a) is related to the ungrammaticality of the relative clause in (30b). (30) a. *Bozaka no manapaka Bakoly. grass DET AT.Cut Bakoly ‚It™s grass that Bakoly is cutting.™ b. *ny zavatra izay manapaka Bakoly DET thing REL AT.cut Bakoly ‚the thing that Bakoly is cutting™ C. ny zavatra izay tapahin™i Bakoly DET thing REL m.cut ~~~.Bakoly ‚the thing that Bakoly is cutting™ For an object to be relativized, the verb must have TT morphology, as shown in (30~). The same is true for object clefts, as can be seen by the contrast between (29b) and (30a). Thus the restriction on clefting reduces to the restriction on relativization. Recall, however, that adjuncts can be clefted without being promoted to subject. This is illustrated in (31a), which has a PP pivot and an AT verb. (31b), on the other hand, shows that adjuncts cannot be relativized with AT morphology. (31) a. Amin™ny antsy no manapaka bozaka i Bakoly. P.GEN.DET knife DET AT.CUt grass Bakoly ‚It is with a knife that Bakoly is cutting grass.™ 720 I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 b. *ny antony izay manapaka bozaka i Bakoly DET reason REL AT.CUt grass Bakoly ‚the reason why Bakoly is cutting grass™ Clearly we cannot simply relate the availabilty of clefts to the grammaticality of rel- atives. Moreover, in (31b) the headless relative cannot mean ‚the one who is cutting grass™ for two reasons. First, the agent of cutting (Bakoly) is expressed within the rel- ative. Second, if clefts have an equative structure, it is somewhat odd to equate a PP with a nominal referring to an individual. Before providing an analysis of (31a), I note that this type of adjunct clefts is not common in the other Austronesian languages mentioned in this paper. CHA explic- itly discuss this point with reference to Malay. They point out that the lack of adjunct clefts correlates with certain gaps in the interpretation of headless relatives. (32) a. ? ?Ke mana yang kau pergi? to where that You go ‚Where are you going? ™ b. ??Yang aku pergi (ialah) ke Kuala Lumpur. that I go is to Kuala Lumpur ‚Where I am going is to Kuala Lumpur.™ The impossibility of the adjunct cleft in (32a) is related to the impossible meaning for the headless relative in (32b). On the other hand, in the closely related language Madurese, adjunct clefts are grammatical and headless relatives may have the inter- pretation disallowed in Malay (Davies, 2000). To account for the grammaticality of adjunct clefts in Malagasy, I suggest that the headless relative is interpreted as an event nominal (like a gerund). In other words, (31a) means ‚The event of Bakoly cutting grass was with a knife™. Invoking the event reading allows a range of obliques to appear in an AT cleft, as is in fact the case. Since the interpretation of headless relatives is more restricted in Malay, adjunct clefts are impossible. The restrictions on headless relatives derive the restric- tions on the range of clefts. This account may at first appear stipulative. In fact, however, zero nominals in Malagasy freely have either an event or an individual interpretation. Both readings are illustrated in (33). (33) a. Faly ny manapaka bozaka. happy DET AT.Cut grass ‚The ones who are cutting grass are happy.™ b. Sarotra ny manapaka bozaka. difficult DET AT.Cut grass ‚Cutting grass is difficult.™ c. Mihira ny tiana. AT.Sing DET ‚lT.lOVe ‚The loved ones are singing.™ I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 721 d. Mahafinaritra ny tiana. AT.happy DET TT.lOVe ‚Being loved is pleasant.™ In (33a), the zero nominal clearly receives an individual reading. (33b), on the other hand, is a gerund-like zero nominal. (33c,d) shows that the individual and the gerund readings are possible for Theme Topic nominals as well as Actor Topic ones. It is therefore not unreasonable to suggest the event and the individual readings are also available for the headless relatives in cleft constructions. Another possible analysis of adjunct clefts involves movement. For examples such as (31a), the adjunct moves to a clausal focus position, rather than being gen- erated as a predicate. The structure is shown in (34). (34) [ [Amin™ny antsy], no [manapaka bozaka ti i Bakoly]. P.GEN.DET knife DET AT.CUt grass Bakoly ‚It is with a knife that Bakoly is cutting grass.™ A similar dual analysis of clefts is suggested by Pinkham and Hankamer (1975) for English and by Chung (1998) for Chamorro. By invoking movement for adjunct clefts, we can maintain a strictly equative analysis for subject clefts. In other words, by complicating the syntax (two alternate derivations), we simplify the semantics. This solution, however, does not provide any explanation for why clefting of adjuncts is ruled out in certain languages (such as Malay) and not in others (like Madurese). 2.5. Summary In this section, I have provided syntactic arguments for analyzing the cleft in Malagasy as a copular construction. The focus is in fact the matrix predicate and the presuppositional clause is a headless relative clause in the subject position. The final two sections of this paper investigate the interpretation of clefts and how this inter- pretation relates to the proposed structure. 3. Interpretation Turning to the semantics of cleft constructions, it has long been noted that they are associated with a certain interpretation: existential presupposition and exhaustiv- ity (Halvorsen, 1978).ﬂ This interpretation is also apparent in Malagasy. ‚I For this section, I rely mainly on data from Malagasy. Data from Madurese cited at the end of this section suggest that the interpretive effects that I identify may be common to clefts in other Austrone- Sian languages. 722 I. Paul /Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 3.1. Existence First, a cleft (it is x that P) presupposes that there is some individual x that has the property P (3x such that Px is true). Hence the presupposition of the cleft in (35b) is that someone painted houses. This clearly contradicts (35a), which asserts that no one painted houses. (35) a. Tsy misy olona nandoko trano . . . NEG exist person PsT.AT.paint house ‚No one painted houses . . . ™ b. # . . . noho izany dia tsy i Koto no nandoko trano. because that TOP NEG Koto DET PsT.AT.paint house ‚... therefore it wasn™t Koto who painted houses.™ A similar conflict arises in (36), which presupposes that someone is painting houses while simultaneously asserting that no one is. (36) *Tsy na iza na iza no mandoko trano. NEG or who or who DET A-r.paint house * ‚It™s no one who is painting houses.™ Finally, it is possible to explicitly point out the failure of the existential presupposi- tion. If speaker A utters a cleft such as (37a) in a context where the presupposition is in fact new information, speaker B can draw attention to this gap. (37) a. A: I Bakoly no nandoko ny tranoko. Bakoly DET PsT.AT.paint DET house. 1 SG(GEN) ‚It was Bakoly who painted my house.™ b. B: Tsy fantatro fa nisy nandoko ny tranonao. NEG ~~ow.~sG(GEN) c PsT™.exist PsT.AT.paint DET hOUSC2SG(GEN) ‚I didn™t know that someone painted your house.™ With a standard declarative clause, there are no existential presuppositions. Hence it is odd for speaker B to state that speaker A™s utterance contains new infor- mation. (38) a. A: Nandoko ny tranoko i Bakoly. PsT.AT.paint DET house. 1 SG(GEN) Bakoly ‚Bakoly painted my house.™ b. B: #Tsy fantatro fa nisy nandoko ny tranonao. NEG know. ~SG(GEN) c PsT.exist PsT.AT.paint DET hOUSe.%G(GEN) ‚I didn™t know that someone painted your house.™ The above data indicate that just as in English, Malagasy clefts carry existential pre- suppositions. I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 723 3.2. Exhaustivity Second, a cleft expresses exhaustive identification. 8. Kiss (1998) provides tests for the exhaustive reading. Consider first question-answer pairs. The answers in (39b,c) to the question in (39a) have different meanings. (39) a. b. C. Nandeha taiza ianao? PST.AT.gO PsT.where 2SG.NOM ‚Where did you go? ™ Nandeha tany Ambositra aho. PST.AT.go PsT.there Ambositra lSG.NOM ‚I went to Ambositra.™ Tany Ambositra no nandeha aho. PST.there Ambositra DET PST.AT.gO ~SCLNOM ‚It was to Ambositra that I went.™ (39b) does not exclude the possibility that I went to other places as well as Ambosi- tra. The cleft construction in (39c), however, is an exhaustive answer; Ambositra is the only destination. Similarly, consider the following pairs.ﬂ (40) a. b. (41) a. b. Novidin™i Bakoly ny satroka sy ny kiraro. PST.TT.buy.GEN.BakOly DET hat and DET shoe ‚Bakoly bought a hat and shoes.™ Novidin™i Bakoly ny satroka. PST.TT.buy.GEN.BakOly DET hat ‚Bakoly bought a hat.™ Ny satroka sy ny kiraro no novidin™i Bakoly. DET hat and DET shoe DET PST.TT.bUy.GEN.BakOly ‚It was a hat and shoes that Bakoly bought.™ Ny satroka no novidin™i Bakoly. DET hat DET PST.TT.bUy.GEN.BakOly ‚It was a hat that Bakoly bought.™ As in the English equivalents, the sentence in (40b) is a logical consequence of the one in (40a). On the other hand, (41b) is not a logical consequence of (41a). In fact, (41b) contradicts (41a). Hence, the cleft construction in (41) passes the test of exhaustivity. Exhaustivity is further illustrated with the following test. Due to the assertion of exhaustivity, there are certain distributional restrictions on the elements that can appear in the focus position. ‚* 8. Kiss attributes this test to Szabolcsi (1981). The judgements in (40) and (41) do not change if the verb is in AT. I use ‚IT in (40) to provide minimal pairs with (41), where ‚IT is necessary to allow cleft- ing of the logical object. 724 I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 (42) a. *Bakoly koa no nandeha tany Ambositra. Bakoly also DET PsT.AT.go PsT.there Ambositra * ‚It was also Bakoly who went to Ambositra.™ b. *Na ny mpianatra votsavotsa aza no nahazo isa tsara. or DET student weak even DET PST.AT.get number good * ‚It was even the weak students who got good grades.™ c. *Na iza na iza no mahavita izany. or who or who DET AT.done that * ‚It™s anyone who can do that.™ These elements appear to have some semantic clash with exhaustive identification. For example, the import of koa ‚also™ in (42a) is to assert that going to Ambositra is true of some other individual as well as Bakoly. Hence the meaning of this adverb conflicts with the assertion of exhaustivity, which leads to the ungrammati- cality of (42a). Since DPs with these semantic features are not permitted in a cleft, we see that the cleft position is associated with a particular interpretation, in this case exhaustivity. Although most of the information I have on other Austronesian clefts does not discuss these interpretational facts, Davies (2000) provides similar data from Madurese. He shows that the clefted position is incompatible with the adverb ghia ‚too. also™. (43) a. Marlena nge-cet roma-na ghia. Marlena Av-paint house-DEF too ‚Marlena painted the house too.™ b. Marlena ghia nge-cet roma-na. Marlena too Av-paint house-DEF ‚Marlena also painted the house.™ c. ﬁMarlena ghia se nge-cet roma-na. Marlena too REL Av-paint house-DEF ‚Marlena also is the one who painted the house.™ (43~) is ill-formed due to the clash between the semantics of ghia ‚also™ and focus. The data in the section have shown that Malagasy clefts are associated with a cer- tain interpretation, parallel to English clefts: the presupposition of existence and the assertion of exhaustivity. I now explain why this interpretation is present, drawing on the structure of clefts proposed in Section 2. In other words, I link the interpreta- tion to the underlying presence of a definite description. 4. Solution I account for the particular focus interpretation of clefts by invoking the headless relative structure. Recall the structure proposed for clefts in Malagasy. I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 125 (44 a. I Sahondra no nanapaka ity hazo ity. Sahondra DET PsT.AT.cut this tree this (lit.) ‚The one who cut this tree was Sahondra.™ b. /--=+-- A A Iﬂ 2% 7 2% focus OP, ... ti I Sahondra no nanapaka ity hazo ity Crucially, the subject DP is a headless relative (‚the one who . . .‚). Headless relatives are definite descriptions and therefore have the same presuppositions as definite descriptions. These are precisely the same presuppositions as those exhibited by clefts, as I discuss immediately below. It is well known that definite descriptions presuppose the existence of the indi- vidual described. Moreover, definite descriptions presuppose (or entail) that there is exactly one referent as described (Strawson, 1950).i3 These aspects of the interpreta- tion of definite descriptions align neatly with the interpretation of clefts. In other words, the pattern identified in the previous section is paralleled by (45)-(46) below, which contain overt definite descriptions. Compare the ungrammaticality of (36) (repeated as (45a)) with (45b). In (45b), the definite description ‚the one who is painting houses™ presupposes the existence of someone painting houses. If this description is predicated of ‚no one™, ungrammaticality results. (45) a. *Tsy na iza na iza no mandoko trano. NEG or who or who DET AT.paint house * ‚It™s no one who is painting houses.™ b. *Tsy na iza na iza ny (olona) mandoko trano. NEG or who or who DET (person) AT.paint house * ‚The one who is painting houses is no one.™ Similarly, compare (46a) with (46b). The adverb koa ‚also™ is incompatible with the uniqueness reading that arises in a definite description in (46b) and with the exhaus- tivity of the cleft in (46a). (46) a. *Rasoa koa no mandoko trano Rasoa also DET A-r.paint house * ‚It™s also Rasoa who is painting houses.™ ﬂ The correct analysis of these presuppositions remains the subject of debate in the semantics and pragmatics literature. 726 I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 b. *Rasoa koa ny (olona) mandoko trano. Rasoa also DET (person) AT.paint house * ‚The one who is painting houses is also Rasoa.™ If we analyze clefts as containing a definite description, these parallels in interpreta- tion are accounted for in a simple manner. 5. Conclusion In this paper, I have proposed a structure for Malagasy clefts where the focussed element is the matrix predicate and the presuppositional clause corresponds to a headless relative in subject position. (47) A A A Iﬂ 2% :A focus OPi . . . ti I argued that this analysis of clefts accounts both for their structural properties and their interpretation. The focussed element patterns with predicates and the presuppo- sitional clause patterns with complex DP subjects. It is the headless relative, a defi- nite description, that induces the focus interpretation associated with clefts. Note that the headless relative structure proposed is quite common in the languages discussed. In other words, Malagasy (as well as the other languages mentioned) allows produc- tive zero nominal formation, consisting of the simple addition of a determiner or other nominal marker to a predicate. Thus the present analysis of clefts meshes with the syntactic structure of Malagasy and is not dependent on special focus features in the syntax or movement to particular focus projections. Instead, the focus reading arises independently and with minimal additional assumptions. References Akmajian, A., 1970. On deriving cleft sentences from pseudo-cleft sentences. Linguistic Inquiry 1, 149-168. Bauer, W. 1991. Maori ko again. Te Reo 34,3-14. Chomsky, N., 1977. On WH-movement. In: P. Culicover, T. Wasow, A. Akmajian (eds.), Formal syn- tax, 71-132. New York: Academic Press. Chung, S., 1998. The design of agreement: Evidence from Chamorro. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Cole, P., G. Hermon and N. Aman, to appear. Clefted questions in Malay. In: D. Gil, J. Collins (eds.), Malay/Indonesian linguistics. London: Curzon Press. I. Paul I Lingua 111 (2001) 707-727 127 Davies, W., 2000. The syntax of the Madurese cleft. Manuscript, University of Iowa. Georgopoulos, C., 1991. Syntactic variables: Resumptive pronouns and A™ binding in Palauan. Dor- drecht: Kluwer. Guilfoyle, E., H. Hung and L. Travis, 1992. Spec of IP and Spec of VP: Two subjects in Austronesian languages. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 10, 375-414. Halvorsen, P.-K., 1978. The syntax and semantics of cleft constructions. Ph.D. thesis, University of Texas. Hardjadibrata, R.R., 1985. Sundanese: A syntactic analysis. Canberra: Australian National University. Higgins, F.R., 1979. The pseudo-cleft construction in English. New York: Garland. Jespersen, 0. 1928. Analytic syntax. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Kader, M., 1976. The syntax of Malay interrogatives. Ph.D. thesis, Simon Fraser University. Keenan, E.L., 1972. Relative clause formation in Malagasy. In: The Chicago which hunt: Papers from the Relative Clause Festival, 169-189. Chicago: CLS. 8. Kiss, K., 1998. Identificational focus versus information focus. Language 74,245-273. Kroeger, P., 1993. Phrase structure and grammatical relations in Tagalog. Stanford, CA: CLSI. Malzac, R.P., 1960. Grammaire Malgache. Paris: Societt d™fiditions Gtographiques, Maritimes et Colo- niales. Paul, I., 2000. Malagasy clause structure. Ph.D. thesis, McGill University. Pearson, M., 1996. Domain phrases and topic arguments in Malagasy existent&. In: M. Pearson, I. Paul (eds.), UCLA Occasional Papers in Linguistics 17, 113-141. Los Angeles: UCLA. Percus, O., 1996. Prying open the cleft. In: Proceedings of NELS 26. Amherst, MA: GLSA. Pinkham, J. and J. Hankamer, 1975. Deep and shallow clefts. In: Proceedings of CLS 11, 429-450. Chicago: CLS. Richards, N., 1998. Syntax versus semantics in Tagalog wh-extraction. In: M. Pearson (ed.), UCLA Occasional Papers in Linguistics 21, 259-275. Los Angeles: UCLA. Rizzi, L., 1997. The fine structure of the left periphery. In: L. Haegeman (ed.), Elements of grammar, 281-337. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Strawson, P.F., 1950. On referring. Mind 59, 320-344. Szabolcsi, A., 1981. The semantics of topic-focus articulation. In: J. Groenendijk, T. Janssen, M. Stokhof (eds.), Formal methods in the study of language, 513-541. Amsterdam: Matematisch Cen- hum. 