ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 www.elsevier.com/locate/lingua Weak monosyllables in iambic verse and the communication of metrical form * Nigel Fabb* Department of English Studies, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow G1 1XH, UK Received 16 October 2000; revised version 28 November 2000 Abstract Generative theories of English iambic pentameter can explain the distribution of prominent syllables (strong syllables in polysyllables) but are not well suited to explaining the comple- mentary facts about the distribution of non-prominent syllables (such as the articles). This paper shows that non-prominent syllables are regularly distributed but less regularly than prominent syllables, and suggests that these facts are not well suited to a generative metrical account. Instead, these regularities are explained by understanding the organisation of the verseline as constituting ostensive evidence for its metrical type, in keeping with the general requirement for verbal art to draw attention to its own form. © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Generative metrics; Iambic pentameter; I0aplicature 1. Linguistic accounts of iambic pentameter When a text is divided into lines we call it 'verse'. When the lines are constrained in the number of syllables or morae they contain, we have metrical verse. Metrical verse thus involves control over some part of the phonology of the text, and the hypothesis from which generative metrics has always worked is that the metrical verse is controlled by rules which resemble phonological rules, l A consequence ¢¢ Thanks to Morris Halle, Carlos Piera, Curt Rice, and a referee for Lingua for comments on earlier versions of this paper. This material was presented at the University of Troms¢, and at the LAGB Autumn 2000 meeting. * Phone: +44 141 548 3799; Fax: +44 141 552 3493; E-mail: N.Fabb@strath.ac.uk i The generative metrical tradition includes for example work by Halle and Keyser (1966, 1971), Kiparsky (1977), Hayes (1983, 1988, 1989), Hanson and Kiparsky (1996), and the articles in Kiparsky and Youmans (1989). See also Fabb (1997) and the overview in Rice (1997). 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: PII: S0024-3841(00)00049-8 772 N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 of this (given that this is a generative theory) is that the metrical rules generate a set of line types and exclude other line types: thus there is a distinction between metrical and unmetrical lines. There have been proposals that this distinction be abandoned: Youmans (1988) and Hayes (1989) propose a notion of gradient met- ricality adapted to a generative approach, while Golston (1998) proposes a con- straint-based metrics, using Optimality Theory, whereby all constraints can be vi- olable and metricality is again gradient. In this paper, I show that it is possible both to have the standard generativist assumption that metricality is absolute, not gradient, while at the same time giving an account of 'gradient tendencies' in met- rical verse. I will be focusing on strict 2 iambic pentameter, one of the most common English meters, and illustrated by the following line from Browning: (1) And thence ye may perceive the world's a dream. The fundamental fact about standard iambic pentameter lines is that they are ten syllables long, and the metrical rules must primarily ensure this. In some varieties of iambic pentameter, lines can be longer or shorter than this within limits, and the metrical rules are adjusted to allow this. A second important fact about standard iambic pentameter lines is that there is a rhythmic pattern within the line, such that strongly stressed syllables are in some sense (to be made precise) 'attracted' to even positions and weakly or non-stressed syllables 'attracted' to odd positions. There is a normative expectation, expressed in overt and widely known rules, that every even syllable is stressed and every odd syllable unstressed. This normative expectation is not, however, borne out by the actual practice of poets writing in this meter. The rhythm of the line, in terms of the sequence of stressed and unstressed syllables in any actual reading of the line, is not fully controlled by the meter: it is possible to have a fourteen-line sonnet in which every line can plaus- ibly be given a different rhythmic pattern in performance. Iambic pentameter is thus 'rhythmically flexible' which is perhaps a reason for its widespread use in English verse, where it can often be used to imitate the rhythms of speech. How- ever, there are some constraints on the rhythm, of which the most important con- straint is that the most prominently stressed syllable in a polysyllabic word must appear in one of six out of the potential ten positions in the line: 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 or 10. This is related to the 'textbook definition' of iambic pentameter as a meter in which stressed syllables fall in positions 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 (and unstressed syllables fall in positions 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9). But it is not the same as the textbook definition. The constraint on polysyllables is the most accurate description we can formulate of the actual practice of poets; the textbook definition does not characterize actual practice 2 The notion of specifically 'strict' iambic pentameter comes from Robert Frost, who distinguishes strict iambic meters from loose iambic meters in which it is not syllables but prominent syllables which are counted (see Halle and Keyser (1999) for an explanation). This paper is concerned only with strict iambic meters. N. Fabb I Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 773 with anything like the same degree of accuracy. I will nevertheless suggest that both the 'textbook definition' and the linguistic generalization about polysyllables can co-exist and contribute to a fuller understanding of how the lines are organized. An accurate linguistic characterization of the rhythm places the polysyllables in the even positions in the line, and in the first position. To illustrate this, consider the following fact. In this paper I will be working with a corpus of 1749 lines by Robert Browning (made up of eight complete poems), and in these lines, there are 2183 polysyllables of which all but nine (0.4%) have their prominent syllable in one of these positions. (Of the nine exceptions, four have their prominent syllable after line- internal pauses, and thus perhaps 'initial' in a way analogous to being at the begin- ning of the line. 3) 1.1. Halle's theory In this paper I will adopt the grid-based approach to metrical structure proposed by Halle (2000; see also Halle and Keyser, 1999). As a grid-based theory, this fol- lows Prince (1983), Hayes (1983), Halle and Vergnaud (1987), and specifically adapts Idsardi's (1992) approach to phonological grids. Halle's theory begins from the assumption that the fundamental problem for a metrical theory is to generate the correct number of metrical units in a line (syllables or morae). Other metrical char- acteristics, such as the placement of stressed syllables, are secondary and derivable from the structures required to achieve the count. For iambic pentameter, the basic number of syllables is ten, so the problem is to have a set of rules which generate a sequence of ten syllables. Halle imposes a constraint that there is no counting higher than three; this is a realistic constraint if we see the metrical rules as anal- ogous to phonological (and syntactic) rules, which can also count no higher than three. Consider for example the line cited above: (1) And thence ye may perceive the world's a dream. If we treat this line as having its length (in syllables) fixed by metrical rules which can count no higher than three, then we proceed as follows. First we identify the metrically relevant elements, syllables, and write them out as a line of asterisks. (2) * * * * * * * * * * And thence ye may perceive the world's a dream. Next we start to count asterisks, either in twos or threes; for iambic pentameter the count in twos will prove best, for reasons to be explained later. We count asterisks by having rules which insert parentheses, thus building units ('feet'); each foot then projects an asterisk onto the next line of a grid which in turn is counted by the 3 See Hayes (1989) for extensive discussion of midline positions in which inversion is licensed by a preceding prosodic-phonological boundary (such as a pause). 774 N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 insertion of parentheses to build still higher-level feet. The count comes to an end when there is one asterisk on a line. So, the first step is to insert parentheses into the line of asterisks, by the follow- ing rule: (3) Insert right parentheses from left to right, iteratively, skipping two asterisks each time. Or more concisely: (4) Insert ), L>R, binary. )* * ) * ,)** ) * Ł )* * ) And thence ye may perceive the world's a dream. This is a line of five feet. In this theory, a foot can be defined using just one kind of parenthesis (i.e. it need not be closed). A foot is a sequence of asterisks to the right of a left parenthesis, or to the left of a right parenthesis. We now identify one el- ement per foot as the head, so that we can count feet. In this meter, we will identify the rightmost element as the head (a choice justified shortly). We project the head to create a second line of the grid: ~5) line 1 * * * * * line0 )* * ) * *) * * ) * * ) * * ) And thence ye may perceive the world's a dream. Now we count the line 1 asterisks. In order to ensure that there are ten line 0 aster- isks (hence ten syllables) we must ensure that there are five line 1 asterisks. It is not immediately obvious how to do this by counting in twos or threes; we solve this by permitting a line-final foot to be short (a general possibility in many meters). Specif- ically, we set the rules to build ternary feet on line 1, and require the final (in the sense of last-built) foot in the line to be binary. In this case the last-built foot will be the leftmost because feet are built from right to left. The next part of the rules is thus as follows: (6) Gridline 1: insert right parentheses from the right edge, iteratively, skipping three syllables (i.e. insert (, R>L, ternary). Project the rightmost head onto the next line (i.e. heads right). Gridline 2: insert right parentheses from the right edge, iteratively, skipping two syllables (i.e. insert (, R>L, binary). Project the rightmost head onto the next line (i.e. heads right). Condition (i): final foot on line 1 is binary. N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 775 line 3 * line 2 ) * * ) line 1 * * ) * * * ) line0 )* * ) * * ) * * ) * * ) * * ) And thence ye may perceive the world's a dream. Note that the leftmost foot on line 1 is binary. It is also an incomplete foot (feet on this line are supposed to be ternary) as can be seen by the fact that the iterative bracket insertion rule inserts a bracket at the right edge, then three asterisks from the right but cannot then insert another bracket (because there aren't another three aster- isks in the gridline). The requirement that the leftmost foot on line 1 is binary is what forces the line to have ten syllables rather than twelve. 4 Now the rules generate exactly ten syllables. We have not yet explained why the prominent syllables in polysyllables are only in positions 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10. We can explain this simply. First, we identify the kind of syllable we are trying to control, and then we say that it must coincide with a line 0 head. We identify the syllable by defining it as a 'stress maximum'. (7) Definition: A stress maximum is a stressed syllable in a polysyllabic word. Condition: A stress maximum must be dominated by a gridline 0 head. This would seem to place such syllables in even positions, but does not explain why a stressed syllable in a polysyllabic word can be in position 1, so-called 'trochaic inversion'. The answer is that in this position, such a syllable is not defined as a stress maximum, because it is not preceded by a syllable (an idea originally pro- posed in Halle and Keyser, 1966). If this is the right approach, it means that a syl- lable in a preceding line cannot be part of the context for defining a line-initial stress maximum; the line is thus an opaque domain. Consider for example the fol- lowing line: (8) line 3 * line 2 ) * * ) line 1 * *) * * * ) line0 )* *)* *)* *)* *) * * ) Qu~ et ly, quiet ly the evening through Here the stressed syllables within polysyllables are underlined. Line-internally they are all in line 0 head positions. The line-initial syllable is not counted as a stress maximum. Compare a rewritten version of the line, which is unmetrical by these rules because one of the stress maxima is not correctly placed. 4 If condition (i) is omitted we get a twelve-syllable line as is found in Philip Sidney's sonnet whose first line is 'Loving in truth and fain in verse my love to show'. 776 N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 (9) line 3 * line 2 ) * * line 1 * *) * * * ) line0 )* * ) * *) * *)* *)* *) the evening through qui et ly, quiet ly A comment is appropriate at this point on polysyllables of three or more syllables. Such words might in principle have two relatively prominent syllables, one with pri- mary and one with secondary stress, e.g. relative to a third unstressed syllable. We might ask whether a syllable carrying secondary stress is also defined as a stress maximum and thus required to match a head position. In the Browning texts under examination here, there are eight lines in which a tri-syllable (or larger) word has its most prominent syllable in an odd position. Seven of these 5 have the most prominent syllable in position 1 : (10) Quietly, quietly the evening through, Carelessly passing with your robes afloat, - Vanity, saith the preacher, vanity! Burningly it came on me all at once, "Pantingly through the dim vast realm transpire. Placable if His mind and ways were guessed, Setebos, Setebos, and Setebos! It is the third syllable in each case which is relevant; it is a syllable potentially car- rying stress (hence a relatively prominent syllable in a polysyllabic word) and in a non-initial odd position, position 3. In fact, in most of these cases it is plausible to say that this third syllable can be reduced so that it is not stressed at all; the most problematic line involves 'Setebos' but since this is a word whose pronunciation is uncertain it isn't clear that the third syllable should be considered prominent. What we do not find is a polysyllabic word like 'serpentining' or 'everybody' in first pos- ition, where there would be an unambiguously prominent syllable in third position. This all suggests that the rule assigning stress maxima does recognise secondary prominence in a polysyllabic word (this restates the discovery made by Kiparsky, 1977). There are many ways to build a grid from binary and ternary iterative rules which will generate a line 0 of ten asterisks. How do we justify this particular way of build- ing the grid? The justification for having binary rules at line 0 is that generalizations about the meter's rhythm must be able to distinguish odd from even syllables, as we 5 The one line which has a line-internal polysyllable with secondary stress is ('Fra Lippo Lippi', 352): (i) When ladies crowd to Church at midsummer. In this case primary stress is on the middle syllable (in position 9, hence a mismatch), while secondary stress is on the first syllable (in position 8, hence a match). This is thus no more problematic than a disyl- labic polysyllable with its prominent syllable in an odd position. N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 777 will show: this fits a binary organisation of line 0 asterisks. The justification for hav- ing heads right at line 0 is that this will allow us to say that there is a relation between being a stressed syllable and being in a head position. The justification for having line 1 be ternary, with a short foot (binary) plus a full foot (ternary) comes from various considerations. 6 One is that the most likely place to find a pause in the iambic pentameter line seems to be after the fourth syllable (this is only a weak tendency). This suggests that this syllable is somehow designatable as different; in terms of the grid, it coincides with a line 1 head if the first foot is binary. Another reason for thinking that the first foot is binary is that there are variants of iambic pentameter, such as that seen in Arnold's 'Dover Beach' in which the line can be shortened as low as four syllables but no lower, suggesting that the requirement for an initial binary foot is inviolable in iambic pentameter and sets a lower limit to the line (see Fabb, 2000). Note that this theory says nothing (at least, nothing directly) about the distribution of monosyllables in general, and more specifically says nothing about the distribu- tion of superweak monosyllables such as articles. They are not stress maxima and thus they are not distinguishable from any other kind of syllable, as far as the rules are concerned. 1.2. Hanson and Kiparsky' s theory Hanson and Kiparsky (1996) propose a theory specifically for metrical verse with a periodic rhythm. Thus unlike Halle, they take rhythm to be fundamental to a specific kind of meter, whereas for Halle counting is fundamental to all kinds of meter. For iambic pentameter, they propose the following account. The structural description of the meter consists of five binary right-headed feet, each consisting of a W metrical position and a S metrical position. The structural description is then matched to the line of verse, ,by making choices from the (uni- versal) realization parameters. The POSITION SIZE realization parameter fixes the size of phonological unit which is matched to the metrical position: for Browning's iambic pentameter (which resembles Milton's in the relevant ways) this is the syl- lable. The PROMINENCE SITE parameter involves a choice between four possible ways of matching strong and weak (S and W) metrical positions with prominent and non- prominent phonological material. For Browning's iambic pentameter, the rule is that Weak metrical positions contain no prominent phonological material: in other words, a stressed syllable in a polysyllabic word cannot be put in a Weak metrical position (an odd position). Prominence settings are cumulative: a single meter can have several conditions operating at the same time. The PROMINENCE TYPE parameter indicates what kind of prominence is involved; for iambic pentameter it is stress. The key fact about iambic pentameter is that there are ten syllables, with stressed syllables in polysyllables found only in positions 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10. So far we have 6 For further evidence for the gridline 1 division of the iambic pentameter line, see Hayes, 1989; Youmans, 1989. 778 N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 an account of the ten syllables: each syllable matches one of the ten metrical pos- itions in the five feet. And we have an account of why stressed syllables in polysyl- lables are in positions 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10: because they are prevented from appearing in positions 3, 5,7 and 9 by the prominence site parameter. What about position 1, where polysyllables can also appear, apparently in contradiction to the prominence site parameter? Hanson and Kiparsky explain this by reference to a general prin- ciple, citing Hayes (1988), that there is "a general metrical principle of closure, whereby beginnings may be lax but endings may be strict" and hence that "the initial metrical constituents of a major metrical or prosodic constituent may be exempted from the prominence constraints to varying degrees". Thus trochaic inver- sion, where a stressed syllable in a polysyllable is in initial position, comes from a relaxing of the rules. Compare Halle's approach where this is instead derived from the fact that the line is an opaque domain for definition of stress maxima, in the sense that a line-initial syllable cannot be defined relative to a syllable in the pre- ceding line and hence cannot be a stress maximum. A true iambic pentameter line is thus parsed as follows. There are no mismatches of prominent syllables to weak positions (except at the beginning, where the rule is relaxed). (11) W S W S W S Qui et ly, qui et ly W S W S the evening through An impossible iambic pentameter line will arise if there is a line-internal mismatch of prominent syllables to weak positions, as here: (12) * W S W S W S W S W S the evening through qui et ly, qui et ly 1.3. The key fact about iambic pentameter Whichever linguistic theory of metrical structure we use (including others not dis- cussed here), the result will always be the same for iambic pentameter: the rules underdetermine the rhythm of the actual verselines. This result is necessary to cap- ture the fact that actual lines of iambic pentameter are rhythmically different, but have some fundamental characteristics in common: in particular, the stressed syl- lable in a polysyllabic word must always be in an even position. Thus the strongest kind of syllable is constrained. The rules formulated in all generative metrical theories of iambic pentameter say nothing about the weakest kind of syllable: unstressed articles 'the' and 'a'. How- ever, these are also subject to constraints on their distribution, as I now show: they tend strongly to be in odd-numbered positions within the line, and if they are in an N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 779 even-numbered position this will tend to be position 2. The question must then arise as to whether monosyllables should be constrained by extending the metrical rules. I will propose that this is the wrong way to deal with the problem: the metrical rules as described in the preceding sections are in fact correct and complete (in principle). Other kinds of regularity are explainable but require a different kind of explanation, appealing not to metrical rules but to pragmatic principles, based on the idea that lines can communicate representations of their own metrical form. 2. The location of weak monosyllables in iambic pentameter verse In this section, I take a small corpus of iambic pentameter lines and look at the distributions of weak monosyllables (the articles 'the' and 'a') and of all polysyl- lables. My corpus consists of the following eight poems by Robert Browning, giving 1749 lines of verse. 7 (13) Andrea del Sarto (Called the Faultless Painter); 1855; 267 lines The Bishop orders his tomb at Saint Praxad's Church Rome, 15--; 1845; 125 lines Caliban upon Setebos or, Natural theology in the island; 1864; 295 lines 'Childe Roland to the Dark Tower came'; 1855; 204 lines Cleon; 1855; 353 lines Fra Lippo Lippi; 1855; 392 lines My Last Duchess; 1842; 56 lines Protus; 1855; 57 lines There are ten metrical positions in a line of iambic pentameter verse; in these poems, the articles appear in all of the first nine metrical positions: (14) Position Position Position Position Position Position Position Position Position Position 1 A common greyness silvers everything,-- 2 'Saw a ball flame down late (yonder it lies) 3 And look a half-hour forth on Fiesole, 4 My gift of a nine-hundred-years-old name 5 The angels, and a sunbeam's sure to lurk: 6 One block, pure green as a pistachio-nut, 7 To crown the issue with a last reward! 8 Than, pausing to throw backward a last view 9 And thence ye may perceive the world's a dream. 10 (no instances) 7 Analysis of meters is necessarily corpus based, but there is no general principle which would govern how one would pick a corpus for metrical analysis. My choice in this case was of a group of texts more or less in the same genre (dramatic monologues) which are in some sense 'central' to Victorian iambic pentameter verse (i.e. famous texts by a famous writer). 780 N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 In the 1749 lines of iambic pentameter in these eight poems, there are 846 articles, 'the' and 'a' or 'an', distributed relative to the ten metrical positions as presented in Table 1. 8 Table 1 Distribution of articles relative to the ten metrical positions in iambic pentameter verse Position Odd (weak) metrical positions Even (strong) metrical positions 1 113 2 43 3 235 4 11 5 129 6 11 7 161 8 7 9 136 10 0 Total 774 72 Thus there are 846 articles of which 72 are in an even position (i.e. 8.5%). The table suggests a differentiation between position 2 and the other positions; if we treat position 2 as 'initial', we find that 29 are in one of the other even positions (i.e. 3.4% of the total). If we compare polysyllables, we get the following results. There are 2183 poly- syllables 9 of which 124 have their most prominent syllable in an odd position (i.e. 5.7 %); once we exclude position 1, we find that 9 have their most prominent sylla- ble in one of the line-internal odd positions (i.e. about 0.4% of the total). There are no polysyllables in which a syllable carrying certain secondary stress is in an odd position (see earlier discussion of trisyllabic polysyllables in initial position). 8 An informal survey of Victorian verse (e.g. all the iambic poems in Karlin, 1997) suggests that Browning is slightly more likely than most poets to have articles in even positions, and slightly more likely to allow articles in positions 4, 6 and 8. Thus for example in Elizabeth Barrett Browning's forty- four 'Sonnets from the Portuguese' I count seven articles in position 2 and none in any other even-num- bered position. In Tennyson's 'Morte d'Arthur' there are seven articles in position 2 and one in position 4 ('All night in a waste land, where no one comes') and none in any other even-numbered position. The poet who most strikingly seems to follow a different pattern is Matthew Arnold; 'Dover Beach' for example, has eight articles in even positions, of which only two are in position 2, four in position 6 and one each in positions 4 and 8. 'Dover Beach' shows that it is indeed possible to have iambic verse with articles in even positions throughout the line; nevertheless most Victorian poets avoid putting articles in even positions at least as much as Robert Browning does. See Fabb (2000). 9 This does not include (a) polysyllables which are treated by the meter systematically as monosyl- lables - such as 'heaven', (b) compounds of two monosyllabic words; but where a polysyllable is part of a compound I have counted it, (c) parts of text which are not iambic pentameter such as the snatches of song in 'Fra Lippo Lippi'. N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 781 Thus we can make the following statements about the distribution of the articles: (a) There is a preference for articles to be in odd metrical positions. (b) If an article is in an even metrical position, there is a preference for position 2. We can make the following general statement about the distribution of articles rela- tive to stressed syllables in polysyllables: (c) The constraints on the distribution of articles are less strong than the constraints on the distribution of stressed syllables in polysyllables. This difference in strength can be seen by comparing the fact that 8.5% of the ar- ticles are in even positions compared with 5.7% of the polysyllables in odd posi- tions; and more clearly by the fact that 3.4% of the articles are in non-initial even positions compared with 0.4% of the polysyllables in non-initial odd positions. 3. Can the rules be adapted? In this section I will ask whether existing rules for iambic pentameter (focusing specifically on those of Halle, and Hanson and Kiparsky) can be adapted to capture these distributional facts about articles. I will conclude that the rules should not be adapted, and that these distributional facts should be explained in some other way. 3.1. Articles tend to be in odd positions We begin with the fact that (in these texts) articles are found ten times more often in odd positions than in even positions, captured by distributional statement (a): There is a preference for articles to be in odd metrical positions. Halle's theory is capable of capturing this fact (in principle), by adding a con- straint, something along the following lines: (15) Constraint (ii): articles must not be dominated by a line 1 asterisk. (The constraint could perhaps be reformulated as 'unstressed syllables ...' or 'unstressed grammatical monosyllables ...' to avoid reference to word class.) Since the line 1 asterisks dominate the even positions, this will keep articles in odd pos- itions. But there are some reasons for thinking that it is not a good idea to add such a constraint. First the constraint is violated by approximately one in every twenty-five articles, which is quite a high degree of violation (far higher than the violations found with polysyllables where it is more like one in every two hundred which violates the rules). This raises questions about whether it should be a constraint at all: are all these lines with 'violations' really unmetrical? A second reason is that it does not resemble any existing constraint for iambic pentameter (or any constraint found for any other meter so far in unpublished applications of Halle's theory). Third, while the facts on the surface about superweak syllables (articles) seem to be complementary to the 782 N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 facts about the distribution of super-strong syllables (stressed syllables in polysyl- lables), they arise in this system for completely different reasons. Polysyllables are not held in place directly by constraints but indirectly by their identification as stress maxima which must match line 0 heads. There is no analogous identification of 'stress minima' for articles. Thus while the rule system is capable of incorporating a rule about articles, there are conceptual reasons for thinking that it should not do so. Hanson and Kiparsky's theory faces equally strong conceptual problems when we write a rule to capture the distribution of articles. Hanson and Kiparsky's promi- nence site parameter is set to 'Weak metrical position cannot match prominent syl- lable', in order to capture the distribution of polysyllables. In order to capture the distribution of articles, which are non-prominent syllables, another parametric set- ting has to be added: 'Strong metrical position cannot match non-prominent sylla- ble', which is complementary to the first setting. This is legitimate within their the- ory, as prominence site settings are, in principle, cumulative. But it is not a desirable move for Hanson and Kiparsky, because it would undermine their basic claim: that English iambic verse is derived by choosing one of three simple options, each involving just one parametric setting. The same problem also arises for Hanson and Kiparsky as arises for Halle: the 'constraint' relating to monosyllables is not in- violable, while the constraint relating to polysyllables is inviolable. This difference is lost if we derive them by complementary but otherwise identical rules. I will sug- gest that this difference between monosyllables and polysyllables can be handled best by deriving the distributions by fundamentally different principles. 3.2. Excursus: explaining articles by treating them as part of polysyllables One possibility that we have not yet considered is the possibility that we can explain the distribution of articles by seeing them as part of polysyllables, at a postlexical level. Articles form clitic groups with the lexical words which follow them, and hence relative to the always-weak syllable in the article, there will always be a stronger syllable in the adjacent or next-but-one syllable to the right of the arti- cle. Thus we might be able to explain why articles end up in odd positions by show- ing that they are pulled or pushed there by being near syllables which are forced by rule to be in even positions. This is the approach taken by Kiparsky (1977:205-211); see also Hayes (1989) who emphasises the closeness of the relation between the article and the following material and its consequences for metrical verse. Kiparsky is interested in monosyl- lables as parts of larger units, and hence looks at e.g. 'the life' as a non-prominent- prominent sequence of syllables which form a linguistic constituent. He suggests that the matching of this kind of constituent with a Strong-Weak sequence is "avoided by nearly all English poets". 1° (Kiparsky does not comment on the fact that position 2 10 I think this is overstating the case. As I suggest in footnote 8, many poets allow some limited place- ment of articles in strong positions; Browning perhaps more than most. Kiparsky however sharply dis- tinguishes Browning from many other poets by suggesting that there is a metrical constraint which Browning violates and others do not. N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 783 more easily allows violations.) This requires an adaptation of the rule for polysyl- lables to allow postlexical combinations to count as polysyllables, a possibility allowed by Hanson and Kiparsky (1996: 291). The direction this argument would take is clear. If a postlexical combination can count as a polysyllable and that polysyllable has its most prominent syllable in an even position, then the article will be in an odd position if the next syllable is stressed, and in an even position if the next-but-one syllable has greater stress. (16) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 It saves a model. So! keep looking so-- 1 2 3 4 567 8 9 10 -- Addresses th__ge celestial presence, "nay-- Thus we could explain the predominance of articles in odd positions if there was a predominance of sequences of [article + relatively strong syllable ...] within clitic groups. But there is no coherent reason to think that such sequences are in some sense 'ten times more likely to occur' in English verse. This would be to say, for example, that the sequence of article + initial-stress polysyllable is ten times more likely than the sequence of article + non-initial-stress polysyllable. But it is not clear how such a claim could be made about the possible combinations of words. As an alternative approach to this idea, it might be hypothesized that Browning avoids combinations of article + unstressed syllable. Thus in the following lines Browning has no article before plural 'incentives', and has a monosyllabic adjective before 'remainder' and 'Jerusalem'. These might possibly be interpreted as strategic avoidances of a certain sequence of article + unstressed syllable. (17) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Beside, incentives come from the soul's self (18) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 The grey remainder of the evening out (19) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 Four great walls in the New Jerusalem, There is also another way of fixing the problem of having an article precede a weakly stressed syllable. An article ends in a vowel, and if the following word begins with a vowel, the vowels can merge to fit a single metrical position, for example combining 'the' and 'award' in: (20) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 'Tis safer for me, if the award be strict, 784 N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 However, even if we take these lines to show ways of avoiding a sequence of article + weak syllable, this can only be seen as a consequence of a general constraint against articles in even positions and not a cause of it. Thus it is not fruitful to derive the general distribution of articles from their posi- tion within clitic groups. 3.3. Where an article is in an even position, this will tend to be position 2 If an article is in an even position, it will tend to be in position 2. Similarly, if the prominent syllable in a polysyllable is in an odd position, it will tend to be in pos- ition 1. Position 2 for articles thus resembles position 1 for stressed syllables in poly- syllables: in both cases, this is the leftmost available position of violation. This would seem to suggest a unified account of how both potential 'violations' are solved, but it is not clear that a unified account is available within any rule system. Consider first Halle's theory. In this theory a stressed syllable in a polysyllabic word is constrained in its distribution by identifying it as a stress maximum and requiring it to match a line 0 head. If the stressed syllable is in first position it can- not be identified as a stress maximum because it is not preceded by anything. In this theory, 'trochaic inversion' (position-1 prominence within a polysyllable) is built into the operation of the rules. However, the rules cannot be extended to position 2. As we have already seen, we cannot plausibly consider an article to be analogously a 'stress minimum' but even if we did, in position 2 it is both preceded and followed by other syllables, and hence would not be differentiated from the other even pos- itions (in the way that position 1 is different from the other odd positions). Looking at the grid more generally, position 2 has no special characteristics differentiating it from the other positions in the line, and so the theory offers no explanation of why position 2 should be more available for articles than any other even position. For Hanson and Kiparsky there are two ways of dealing with 'violations' in pos- ition 2. One is to appeal to the notion that rules are relaxed at the beginning of the line, so that position 2 is a position of relaxation just like position 1. This will work, and in fact I return to it in the next section; note however that it works precisely because it is not built into the rule system but is a meta-principle overriding the rules. Another approach would be to look at the article as part of a clitic group. Just under half (19 out of 43) of the position 2 articles in Browning are followed by an indubitably prominent syllable in the form of a phrase-final noun. If a clitic group counts as a polysyllable, then this would be a clear instance of a mismatch between a prominent syllable and a weak position (position 3): (21) W S W S W S W S W S There's [the bell ] clinking from the chapel-top; 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 89 10 This type of mismatch is only ever found at the beginning of the line. This might suggest that it is a type of violation which is a characteristic 'line-initial' violation, N. Fabb / Lingua II1 (2001) 771-790 785 but note that now the violation involves not position 1 or 2 but position 3. Again the beginning of the line seems to be a place of violation, but the condition seems increasingly loose, spreading deeper into the line, and furthermore spreading in a way in which the condition on polysyllables is unable to do: position 3 is not a pos- ition of violation for polysyllables. In the next section I ask whether line-initial vi- olations should fall within the rule system at all. However, there is one further comment to make about articles in position 2, which is that they fit a prediction made by Hayes (1989). Hayes suggests that there is a constraint against a phonological-phrase-final prominent syllable being preceded by a non-prominent syllable which is in a Strong metrical position. For us this means that there is a constraint against a noun phrase consisting just of an article followed by a noun, where the article is in even position, as in the following line (which vi- olates the constraint). (22) Paint th___ee soul, never mind the legs and arms! There are in fact nineteen instances of this 'mismatch' in the Browning lines, and all are in second position. This suggests again that position 2 is different from the other even positions as a place of 'violation'. 4. A different way to get rhythm: the communication of form I have formulated descriptive generalizations about articles in iambic pentameter. These descriptive generalizations cannot be dealt with by current metrical theories, and I will suggest that this is as it should be. The descriptive generalizations are: (a) There is a preference for articles to be in odd metrical positions. (b) If an article is in an even metrical position, there is a preference for position 2. (c) The constraints on the distribution of articles are less strong than the constraints on the distribution of stressed syllables in polysyllables. Generative metrics, like all generative linguistics, makes a fundamental distinc- tion between the grammatical and the ungrammatical - here, between the metrical line and the unmetrical line. It is not well suited to rules which are violable to a lim- ited extent. Thus for example, Halle's approach to trochaic inversion, which builds it into the rule system, is more true to the principles of a generative approach than is Hanson and Kiparsky's approach to trochaic inversion, which derives it from a meta- principle which permits rule violation at the beginning of the line. Similarly, neither approach is well suited to capture the fact that weak monosyllables are regularly placed but less regularly placed than prominent syllables in polysyllables. I now explore another, quite different, way of getting certain regularities in verse, which is capable of capturing the fact that these regularities are strong tendencies rather than rigid rules. We assume that metrical lines are governed by generative met- rical rules, and that these rules govern line length and the placement of prominent 786 N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 polysyllables, along lines proposed by Halle or by Hanson and Kiparsky (or any other generative theory). But to capture the distribution of articles, we must exit from those areas of language which are regulated by generative rule - syntax, phonology, and generative metrics - and enter pragmatics. Consider the textbook definition of iambic pentameter. This sees iambic pentame- ter as a sequence of five feet, with each foot consisting of an unstressed followed by a stressed syllable. If this line had exactly this structure it would be considered 'reg- ular'. Most actual lines of iambic pentameter (which do not have this exact structure) are then considered to be variations on this 'base rhythm' or 'metrical norm' (both terms used by Fussell, 1979). This notion of iambic pentameter has been codified since almost the earliest verse in the meter, and it can be assumed that most poets and their audiences would have had explicit knowledge of the meter in this way. Generative metrical approaches usually ignore the poet's and audience's explicit knowledge of a meter. This is for several reasons. First, generative linguistics in gen- eral ignores prescriptive and explicit grammatical knowledge, which is held to be unreliable; in fact, this turns out to be true of iambic pentameter which has regular- ities involving polysyllables which are not explicitly codified or widely known. Sec- ond, as a general principle it is clear that metrical competence (in a generativist sense) is independent in principle from explicit knowledge of rules; Jakobson (fol- lowing Lord) famously made this point for the Serbian epic poets (guslars), who were able to distinguish metrical from unmetrical lines which differed only in word- boundary placement, but without explicitly knowing the rules or having a vocabulary for describing word boundaries. Third, a general assumption about the rule systems described by generative theories, including generative metrics, is that they are encap- sulated, neither accessible to conscious interference nor in turn influenced by con- scious knowledge. However, as Jakobson (1960) argued, verbal art is different from general verbal behaviour, by the dominance therein of the poetic function of language, defined as "The set (Einstellung) toward the MESSAGE as such, focus on the message for its own sake" (Jakobson, 1960: 356). This difference means that conscious knowledge, especially knowledge of form, can come into play. The poetic function is the draw- ing of attention to form. The workings of Jakobson's poetic function can be restated in terms of the notion of 'ostension', defined by Sperber and Wilson (1995: 49) as behaviour which makes manifest an intention to make something manifest. Sperber and Wilson suggest that human intentional communication is a case of ostension: all verbal behaviour makes manifest an intention to make something manifest. What is special about verbal art (restating Jakobson) is that verbal art makes manifest an intention to make its form manifest. Ostension comes with a tacit guarantee of rel- evance: in the case of verbal art this is a guarantee that it will be worth the hearer's while to put effort into paying attention to form; I return later to how this effort is rewarded. Paying attention to form involves naming form, drawing on knowledge of form, and so on - and hence draws upon the stereotyped characterizations of, for example, iambic pentameter which everyone knows. Thus the codified rules of iambic pentameter, as part of general knowledge, are not necessarily irrelevant to the actual practice of poets. N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 787 The codified rules operate, I suggest, as follows. Writers, readers, performers and listeners for English verse characteristically have available the following assump- tion: 'If a line has the stereotyped rhythmic pattern de-dum-de-dum-de-dum-de-dum- de-dum it is in iambic pentameter'. This assumption is warranted when the line has a rhythmic pattern which resembles this stereotyped rhythmic pattern, and is war- ranted more or less strongly, depending on the closeness of resemblance between the line's rhythmic pattern and the stereotyped rhythmic pattern. Interpreting utterances as evidence of communication intentions involves (according to Sperber and Wilson) both decoding and inference. The decoding here involves the development of a prosodic phonological representation of the utterance - possibly a verse-metrical representation of the utterance, organizing syllables into head or non-head positions in a grid. This may then resemble a stereotyped rhythmic pattern. It is the degree of resemblance between the decoded structure and the stereotype which warrants, to a certain degree, the inference that the line is in iambic pentameter. Thus I suggest that one of the practices of poets is to persistently communicate that their texts have a certain form. In this sense, 'form' is a meaning, the content of an inference, and communicated like all meanings by the text's presentation of evi- dence which is interpreted in the context of general knowledge (Sperber and Wilson, 1995). Thus a text in iambic pentameter communicates, amongst its other meanings, the meaning 'This text is in iambic pentameter'. It does so precisely as the traditional metrical analyses say: the text approximates to an explicit and codified metrical norm, which is the repeated iambic pattern of: (23) de-dum-de-dum-de-dum-de-dum-de-dum Approximation to a form is thus a way of organising the text as evidence for an inference. This is why articles tend to be in odd positions; this placement is not forced by the generative metrical rules, but is a consequence of the need to imitate a certain normative pattern (which places non-prominent syllables in odd positions), in order to communicate the metrical form of the text. And crucially, because the placement of articles is driven by the need to communicate, it is not therefore required to be completely consistent: no inviolable rule forces the article into the odd positions. As a general strategy, we might put all tendencies in metrical verse (as opposed to rigid metrical-unmetrical divisions) into pragmatics in this way. Evidence for form can be stronger or weaker, and hence the placement of articles relative to metrical norms can be more or less regular. Note, incidentally, that there is still potentially a place for the metrical rules, or more specifically for the metrical grid (or equivalent structural description in another theory) in understanding the placement of the articles. If the articles are to be in odd positions, then the question arises as to how odd positions are identified, even prag- matically: the answer must come by reference to the grid. Without the grid, it is not clear that the notions of 'odd' and 'even' syllable can even be formulated; it is the grid which differentiates them (odd syllables are those which do not project to line 1, even syllables are those which do project to line 1). 788 N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 What about the initial looseness, the fact that articles in even positions are most likely to be in position 2? Given that this is a tendency rather than a rule, and as I have argued above may not be open to explanation by rule, we might explain it as follows. One of the characteristics of iambic pentameter is that it has initial rhythmic irregularity; it is precisely this which drives the idea (Hayes, 1989; Hanson and Kiparsky, 1996) that there is a meta-rule permitting irregularity at the beginning of the line. I suggest an adaptation of this notion, so that 'occasional initial rhythmic irregularity' is one of the kinds of evidence for iambic pentameter, explicitly manip- ulated by poets. Thus we can posit an assumption 'If the line begins with a rhythmic irregularity it is in iambic pentameter', which participants in the verbal art bring to the text. If we allow second-position articles to be an instance of this kind of evi- dence, then we can see the occasional use of second-position articles as evidence for the meter. Note that no generative metrical rule is being violated here: there is no generative metrical rule about the placement of articles. We can also see first-position irregularity, involving polysyllables, as another instance of evidence for iambic pentameter. This is by far the most common kind of 'irregularity'. Notice however that in Halle's theory it is at the same time a possibil- ity within the rules; thus trochaic inversion is both perfectly regular for the metrical rules, and at the same time a kind of evidence for iambic pentameter in the prag- matics. In Hanson and Kiparsky's theory on the other hand it is an irregularity of the metrical rules as well as being evidence for iambic pentameter; I suggest that Halle's approach is therefore to be preferred as it retains the notion of the generative metrics as having inviolable rules and making a sharp distinction between the metrical and the unmetrical. If we adopt Sperber and Wilson's approach, and see verbal art as manifesting an intention to draw attention to its own form, then we need to explain how relevance is achieved: what reward is offered the hearer who builds inferences about the form of a literary text? Unlike most verbal communication, it is often not clear that the heater's knowledge is altered by the communication of form in any useful way: after you have read a hundred sonnets, what is the reward for acquiring the assumption that the hundred-and-first is in the same meter - iambic pentameter - as all the others? Perhaps instead the reward is a cognitive reward which arises in some other way. The communicated version of iambic pentameter is a fully periodic rhythmic template for the line. But the actual rhythm of any line, while it may conform to gen- erative metrical rules, is nevertheless rarely fully periodic; this pattern is processed (eg. in the phonology, or wherever metrial form is processed) simultaneously with the pragmatic derivation of a fully periodic pattern. Thus there is a contradiction between two kinds of rhythmic, metrical form: the generated metrical form and the inferred metrical form. It is a reasonable working hypothesis that in verbal art, con- tradictory derivations from the same source are a source of aesthetic experience; we see this in ambiguity, metaphor, and other ways in which contradictory meanings hold simultaneously of a text (cf. Empson, 1977). I suggest that this is equally true of form (here, in part, seen as a kind of meaning, the content of an inference), where contradictions can be co-present and thus a source of aesthetic experience, which is the reward promised by the guarantee of relevance. N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 789 5. Conclusion In this paper I have proposed that there are two quite different sources of regular- ity in metrical verse. Some regularities (the completely consistent regularities) are generated by inviolable rules in some encapsulated area of 'metrical cognition'. For iambic pentameter these regularities are the counting out of metrical units and the placement in metrical positions 1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 of prominent syllables within polysyllables. Other regularities arise from the arrangement of the text in imitation or approximation towards metrical norms, specifically towards the metrical norm of a periodic sequence of unstressed followed by stressed syllables. These arrange- ments are arrangements of evidence for implicatures about the literary characteristics of the text. These regularities will be tendencies, with the strength of the tendency being at the same time the strength of the evidence for the meter. Distinct and iden- tifiable 'irregularities' such as line-initial rhythmic disruption can also be seen as organisations of the text which mimic codified disruptions as evidence for the meter: we know that it is iambic pentameter partly because it has initial disruptions. This division of labour between generative rules and pragmatic principles is characteristic of the special kinds of regularity and tendency which are found in verbal art, and may be one of the sources of the experiential (aesthetic) rewards of verbal art. References Empson, W., 1977. The structure of complex words. London: Chatto & Windus. Fabb, N., 1997. Linguistics and literature: Language in the verbal arts of the world. Oxford: Blackwell. Fabb, N., 2000. The meters of 'Dover Beach'. Unpublished manuscript. Fussell, P., 1979. Poetic meter and poetic form. New York: McGraw-Hill. Golston, C., 1998. Constraint-based metrics. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 16, 718-770. Halle, M., 2000. On stress and meter and on English iambics in particular. Unpublished manuscript. Halle, M. and S.J. Keyser, 1966. Chaucer and the study of prosody. College English 28, 187-219. Halle, M. and S.J. Keyser, 1971. English stress: Its form, its growth and its role in verse. New York: Harper & Row. Halle, M. and S.J. Keyser, 1999. On meter in general and on Robert Frosts loose iambics in particular. In: Linguistics: In search of the human mind, 130-153. Halle, M. and J.-R. Vergnaud, 1987. An essay on stress. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Hanson, K. and P. Kiparsky, 1996. A parametric theory of poetic meter. Language 72(2), 287-335. Hayes, B., 1983. A grid-based theory of English meter. Linguistic Inquiry 14(3), 395--420. Hayes, B., 1988. Metrics and phonological theory. In: F. Newmeyer (ed.), Linguistics: The Cambridge survey, Vol. 2, 220-249. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hayes, B., 1989. The prosodic hierarchy in meter. In: P. Kiparsky and G. Youmans (eds.), Phonetics and phonology 1: Rhythm and meter, 201-260. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Idsardi, W., 1992. The computation of stress. Doctoral dissertation, MIT. Jakobson, R., 1960. Closing statement: Linguistics and poetics. In: T. Sebeok (ed.), Style in language, 350-377. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Karlin, D., 1997. The Penguin book of Victorian verse. London: Allen Lane. Kiparsky, P., 1977. The rhythmic structure of English verse. Linguistic Inquiry 8, 189-247. Kiparsky, P. and G. Youmans, eds., 1989. Phonetics and phonology 1: Rhythm and meter. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Prince, A., 1983. Relating to the grid. Linguistic Inquiry 14(1), 119-100. 790 N. Fabb / Lingua 111 (2001) 771-790 Rice, C., 1997. Generative metrics. GLOT International 2(7), 3-7. Sperber, D. and D. Wilson, 1995. Relevance: Communication and cognition. Second edition. Oxford: Blackwell. Youmans, G., 1988. Iambic pentameter: Statistics or generative grammar? Language and Style 19, 388-404. Youmans, G., 1989. Milton's meter. In: P. Kiparsky and G. Youmans (eds.), Phonetics and phonology 1: Rhythm and meter, 341-379. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 