ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 www.eIsevier.nl/locate/lingua The relevance of Argumentation Theory* Corinne ken* Dept. of Linguistics, University College, London, Cower Street, London WC1 6BT, UK Received 12 December 1999; revised version 5 February 2000 Abstract In this paper, I examine Argumentation Theory (AT), a semantic framework best known for its detailed analyses of expressions with non-truth-conditional meaning, such as but and even. I sketch the development of the theory from its inception in the mid/late 1970s to the present day and I examine the basic AT notions and some of the theory™s implications. In the last section, I discuss some problems with AT, e.g. its lack of a principled semantics/prag- matics distinction and its inability to explain why language is, quite routinely, used to convey information about the world. I then briefly suggest how a cognitive theory with a principled semantics/pragmatics distinction, such as Relevance Theory, can avoid the most serious prob- lems encountered by AT. 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Argumentation Theory; Relevance Theory; Argumentative operators; Non-truth- conditional semantics; Cognitive pragmatics 1. Introduction While many current semantic theories set aside those linguistic expressions that don™t succumb to a truth-conditional treatment, e.g. but, even, and yet, both Argu- mentation Theory (AT) and Relevance Theory (RT) have given such elements par- ticular attention. It is not my concern in this paper to make detailed comparisons of their specific analyses but rather to examine some fundamental theoretical differ- ences between them. For instance, the analyses of but within the two theories (Anscombre and Ducrot, 1977, in AT, Blakemore, 1989, in RT) are remarkably sim- * I would like to thank Robyn Carston for the time and patience she has invested in discussing several versions of this paper with me. Her encouragement, support and inspiration have made all the difference. I am also grateful to Deirdre Wilson for her many helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper. Needless to say, all mistakes are my own. * E-mail: c.iten@ucl.ac.uk 0378-2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00008-5 666 C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 ilar and, arguably, the grounds for choosing between them lie more with their theo- retical underpinnings than with the details of the particular accounts. For this reason, my aim here is to investigate the central concepts and assumptions of Argumentation Theory. Obviously, it would quite likely be the work of a lifetime to capture AT, a theory which has been evolving for a quarter of a century, in all its detail and to do it justice in every nuance. Therefore, all I can hope to do here, is give a (possibly too) broad characterisation of the theory and some of its development, and point out some of the difficulties it runs into. In its present state, AT is a non-cognitive, non-truth-conditional semantic theory, which takes linguistic utterances (as opposed to abstract sentence-types) as its domain. Its aim is to provide a semantic deep structure for each utterance, which includes a specifi- cation of the argumentative potential of the utterance (Nyan, 1998). As mentioned above, the theory has produced some promising accounts of linguistic expressions encoding non-truth-conditional meaning, notably hut and evelz (see e.g. Anscombre and Ducrot, 1983; Nyan, 1998). However, as will be shown in this paper, the theory itself suffers from some very serious flaws, especially in its later incarnations (e.g. Ducrot, 1993). In sections 2 to 5, I will give an outline of the central points of AT, show its devel- opment spanning two decades and indicate (only indicate) how argumentation theo- rists account for certain key non-truth-conditional expressions. In these sections I will mostly keep criticisms and queries to footnotes so as not to distract from the presen- tation. I will give a fuller critical discussion and evaluation of the theory in section 6.1, paying special attention to the move from a semantics with some truth-condi- tional and some non-truth-conditional elements to a completely non-truth-conditional semantics as it is argued for by Ducrot (1993). In the final sub-section, the AT approach will briefly be compared with the cognitive approach of Relevance Theory, which also takes a non-truth-conditional view of linguistic semantics, but, unlike AT, maintains a distinction between two kinds of linguistic meaning, conceptual and procedural, and applies the notion of truth conditions to mental representations. 2. The beginnings of Argumentation theory AT is based on the view that it is a fundamental characteristic of utterances that they can be used as premises or conclusions in arguments. It™s important to note that the nature of these arguments is such that they cannot be captured by the standard rules of logic. Anscombre and Ducrot (1976) observed that utterances with the same informa- tional (i.e. truth-conditional) content cannot always be used as arguments in favour of the same set of conclusions. For instance, according to Anscombre and Duncrot (henceforth A & D), (1) and (2) have the same informational content, i.e. the same truth conditions.™ However, (1) can be used as an argument in favour of ™ In fact, this is an arguable point. It could also be claimed that as tall as has the semantic value of at least the same height as. For further discussion of this topic see Atlas (1984), who, incidentally, argues against both positions and offers a third possibility. C. Iten I Lingua 1 IO (2000) 665499 661 both (3a) and (3b). (2), on the other hand, can only be used as an argument in favour of (3a). Thus, (4a) and (4b) are both perfectly acceptable, whereas (5b) is unacceptable. (1) Peter is the same height as Mary. (2) Peter is as tall as Mary. (3) a. Peter is tall for his age. b. Peter is short for his age. (4) a. Peter is tall for his age: he™s the same height as Mary who is a year older. b. Peter is short for his age: he™s the same height as Mary who is a year younger (5) a. Peter is tall for his age: he™s as tall as Mary who is a year older. b. *Peter is short for his age: he™s as tall as Mary who is a year younger. (examples translated and adapted from Anscombre and Ducrot, 1976: 10) Examples of this sort led Anscombre and Ducrot to believe that a purely truth-con- ditional semantics was not sufficient and that the argumentative potential of an utter- ance was an important aspect of its meaning. In early AT (e.g. A & D, 1976) the argumentative potential of an utterance was characterised in terms of the conclusions it could be used to support. Thus, it would be part of the meaning of (1) that it can be used as an argument for both (3a) and its contrary (3b). In fact, A & D would say that the argumentative orientation of (1) was neutral (see e.g. Moeschler and Reboul, 1994: 314-315). Similarly, the fact that (2) can only be used to support the conclusion in (3a) is part of the meaning of (2). Unlike (I), the argumentative orientation of (2) is not neutral; this utterance is ori- ented towards conclusions of the type in (3a). The fact that (1) and (2) and other examples of the same sort, clearly differ in their encoded meaning, even though they don™t differ in their truth-conditional con- tent,* led A & D (1976: 8) to postulate an integrated pragmatics (pragmatique ink?- gre™e). They call it a ‚pragmatics™ because it is concerned with the sort of meaning that can™t be captured in terms of traditional truth-conditional semantics. What they mean by ‚integrated™ is that the non-truth-conditional aspects of the meaning of as . . . as in (2) are, nevertheless, aspects of its encoded meaning and do not depend on the recovery of some prior truth-conditional semantic meaning the way, for example, Gricean conversational implicatures depend on the recovery of the truth-conditional content of the utterance (‚what is said™). In perhaps more intuitive terms, A & D™s integrated pragmatics could be seen as a non-truth-conditional semantics, which they saw, at that time, as existing alongside a traditional truth-conditional semantics. In effect, it seems that the postulation of an integrated pragmatics means that there is no semantics/pragmatics distinction in AT, since it is not clear that A & D also allow for a non-integrated pragmatics which deals with non-encoded aspects of utterance meaning. It will be seen at the end of this paper that this is an important issue. * See note 1 668 C. lten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 3. Argumentative contents, the law of negation and the law of inversion 3.1. Sentence (phrase) and utterance (&once) Before presenting A & D (1983)‚s more detailed way of accounting for examples like (1) and (2), let me say something about their conception of the basic notions of sentence (phrase) and utterance (&once™). As mentioned in the introduction, A & D (1983) are interested in utterance meaning. By ‚utterance™ (&once™) they (1983: 84) mean utterance token, i.e., as they put it, linguistic material with ‚historical™ charac- teristics (e.g. a specific position in space and time). They contrast this with the notions of utterance type (&o&-type) and ‚sentence™ (phrase). According to them, the utter- ance type is the linguistic material the utterance consists of. Thus, for A & D, (6b) and (7), which they see as an ‚act of hoping™, are tokens of the same utterance type because, at least in French, they both contain exactly the same linguistic material. (6) a. Est-ce que Pierre va venir au rendez-vous? ‚Is Peter coming to the meeting? ™ b. J™espere. ‚I hope so.™ (7) J™espere. ‚I™m hoping.™ (A & D, 1983: 84) A & D™s ‚sentence™ (phrase), on the other hand, is a theoretical construct, the deep structure underlying an utterance (token). Thus, for them (6b) is a token of the ‚sen- tence™ in (8), while the ‚sentence™ underlying (7) will be just J™esphe. (8) J™espere que p. ‚I hope that p.™ For A & D, utterance tokens are the starting point, the ‚observable facts™ (A & D, 1983: 80-81; Ducrot, 1984: 180) on which their work is based. In a bid to account for the meaning of utterances, each of them is assigned a ‚sentence™ or deep struc- ture. While statements concerning utterances are intended to describe the ‚facts™, those concerning ‚sentences™ are intended to explain them. This shows that A & D™s notion of ‚sentence™ (phrase) is significantly different from what is generally under- stood by ‚sentence™ in linguistics and philosophy. For this reason, 1 am following Nyan (1998) in referring to A & D™s phrase as ‚deep structure™ rather than ‚sentence™ in the rest of this paper. A & D (1983: 85) and Ducrot (1984: 180) call the semantic value of utterances sense and the semantic value of deep structures signification. Analogous to utter- ances and deep structures themselves, senses are observable, but significations are not (Ducrot, 1984: 180). According to Ducrot (1984: 181-183), the signification of a deep structure is a set of instructions as to how to assign sense to the utterance. Thus to know the signification of the deep structure underlying (9), is to know what to do to interpret an utterance of it. C. lten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 669 (9) The weather™s nice. (from Ducrot, 1984: 181) Ducrot claims that it is part of the signification of the deep structure underlying (9) that the hearer is instructed to look for the place the speaker is talking about and to accept that the speaker is asserting the existence of fine weather in that place. The sense of the utterance, on the other hand, Ducrot describes as a description of the event of making the utterance (Pnonciation). This includes information about the illocutionary force of the utterance and its argumentative potential. According to Ducrot (1984: 1 SO), the systematic association between senses and utterances is an ‚observable fact™. To explain this observable association, he chooses to associate the theoretical construct of signification with the deep structures that underlie utterances. He believes that this is an interesting way of proceeding because he supposes that it™s possible to formulate laws to calculate the signification of a deep structure on the basis of its lexico-grammatical properties and different laws to predict the sense of an utterance on the basis of the signification of the deep struc- ture that underlies the utterance. While Ducrot sees the signification of deep struc- tures in terms of instructions, A & D (1983) saw it in terms of contents (contenus). This is what the next sub-section is concerned with. 3.2. Contents (contenus) Anscombre and Ducrot (1983 : 79-l 13) give a detailed analysis of the meaning of utterances like (1) and (2) above. First, they make it clear that they don™t want to assign meaning to utterances themselves, but rather to the deep structures underlying them. Thus, each deep structure is given a set of ‚contents™ (contenus), some of them asserted, some of them presupposed. The asserted contents are equivalent to infor- mational or ‚factual™ (or, indeed, truth-conditional) contents, and at least some of the presupposed contents are seen as argumentative. According to Anscombre and Ducrot (1983: 102), (2) will have the asserted content in (10a) and the presupposed content in (lob). (2) Peter is as tall as Mary. (10) a. [Peter™s height equals Mary™s height] b. [[Peter™s height equals Mary™s height] and [Peter is tall] have the same argu- mentative orientationI Although they don™t spell this out, it seems reasonable to assume that they would say that (1) has the same asserted, or factual, content as (2) i.e. (lOa), but that it lacks the (argumentative) presupposed content in (lob). Hence its neutral argumentative orientation. The idea is that these contents are arbitrarily assigned to a finite number of core deep structures (phrases-noyaux) and that the contents of more complex deep structures can be calculated on the basis of the contents of the core deep structures 3 The square brackets indicate that we are dealing with contents. 670 C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 which make up the more complex deep structure (A & D, 1983: 97). This is done with the help of two basic rules: the law of negation (la Loi de Ne™gation) and the law of inversion (la Loi d™Znver.sion), which will be illustrated below. All in all, A & D™s semantic description involves three steps or mechanisms. The first assigns a set of asserted (factual) contents and presupposed contents, some of which are argumentative, to each core deep structure. The second derives new con- tents from those that make up the meaning of the core deep structure using the laws of negation and inversion. The third uses the results of the first two mechanisms to assign an argumentative orientation to the whole (complex) deep structure.4 The best way to see how this works is to look at some examples. 3.3. The law of negation (la Loi de Negation) Anscombre and Ducrot (1983: 99-104) account for the meaning of (11) as fol- lows. (11) Peter is wrong to believe that he™s as tall as Mary. (12) a. But he is quite tall. b. *But he is quite short. First of all, they observe that an utterance of (11) can be followed quite easily with an utterance of (12a) but not with an utterance of (12b). They analyse the meaning of but in such a way that it can only felicitously connect two clauses with opposite argumentative orientation.5 Therefore, A & D predict that (11) and the clause after but in (12a) have opposite argumentative orientations, while (11) and the clause after but in (12b) have the same argumentative orientation (hence the infelicity when 11 is followed by 12b). They then proceed to show that this is the case by appealing to the law of negation. A & D start by assuming that P in (13) has the asserted content a and the presup- posed content b. They then assign the whole deep structure in (13) the asserted con- tent II and the presupposed contents p, and p2 in ( 14).6 (13) X is wrong to believe that P. (14) c1: [not-P] PI: [bl p2: [X believes that a] 4 NB. The first two mechanisms assign argumentative orientation to contents and not to the deep struc- ture. Also note that, from this point onwards, the argumentative orientation of deep structures and utter- ances is only ever given in comparative terms, e.g. ‚same as™ or ‚opposite™. s Clearly, this can™t be the only condition for the felicitous use of but. If it were, utterances of the form ‚P but not-P™ should be felicitous, since, presumably, P and not-P have opposite argumentative orienta- tions. However, utterances of this form clearly are not felicitous: For instance, Peter is tall but he™s not fall is not acceptable. It is quite conceivable that, at this stage, A & D would say that such utterances are not acceptable because their asserted contents are contradictory. For a fuller AT account of but see A & D (1977). 6 It seems curious that there is no asserted content along the lines of ‚X is wrong about something™. C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 671 As mentioned above, (2) is assigned the asserted content a and the argumentative presupposed content b in (15). (2) Peter is as tall as Mary. (15) a: [Peter™s height equals Mary™s height] b: [[Peter™s height equals Mary™s height] and [Peter is tall] have the same argu- mentative orientation] Now (11) can be assigned contents on the basis of the contents of (2) and (13). (11) will thus have the asserted content c1 and the presupposed contents pi and p2 in (16), where pi is an argumentative content. (11) Peter is wrong to believe that he™s as tall as Mary. (16) ~1: [Peter™s height doesn™t equal Mary™s height] p,: [[Peter™s height equals Mary™s height] and [Peter is tall] have the same argumentative orientation] p2: [Peter believes that his height equals Mary™s] Now, the argumentative orientation of the deep structure underlying (11) cannot be calculated on the basis of (16) because the presupposed content p,, which is con- cerned with argumentative orientation, does not apply to the asserted content a, but to its unnegated counterpart. This is where the law of negation comes in. A & D™s law of negation is given in (17). (17) Law of Negation: If c, and c2 are two contents and if a deep structure has the content cg: [ci is an argument for c,], then this can be re-written as [+1 is an argument for ++].7 (A & D, 1983: 101) Since ‚c, is an argument for c2™ is equivalent to ‚ci and c2 have the same argumenta- tive orientation™, the law of negation can be applied to I3, in (16) to yield plr, given in (18). (18) p™, : [T[Peter™s height equals Mary™s height] and T[Peter is tall] have the same argumentative orientation] A & D call this process of deriving a presupposed content which applies to the asserted content of a deep structure from one which doesn™t apply to the asserted content with the help of the laws of the second mechanism centruge (A & D, 1983: 103). ™ This shows clearly that ‚is an argument for™ is not equivalent to the material conditional and that argumentative laws are not based on the rules of standard logic. For, from P + Q, 7P -+ -Q does not follow. 612 C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 The third mechanism assigns an argumentative orientation to a deep structure on the basis of its argumentative presupposition after this presupposition has been ‚cen- tred™ on the asserted content of the deep structure. This means that now an argu- mentative orientation can be assigned to the deep structure underlying (11) by using p™, in (18). I n th is way, (11) comes out as having the same argumentative orientation as ‚Peter is not tall™, which is obviously the opposite of the argumentative orientation of ‚Peter is tall™. This explains why the use of but to connect (11) and (12a) is felic- itous, while the result of using but to connect (11) with (12b) is rather less accept- able. 3.4. The law of inversion (la Loi d™hrversion) As Anscombre and Ducrot (1983: 104-l 11) observe, the law of inversion con- cerns two sets of argument and conclusion. First, the law of inversion is given at the (observational) level of the utterance (as opposed to the theoretical level of the deep structure of the utterances, i.e. what A & D refer to as the ‚sentence™). It states that if utterance u is a stronger argument for conclusion c than utterance u™for conclusion cﬂ, then the negation of U™ (not-u? will be a stronger argument for not-c™than not-u is for not-c. This shows again that A & D™s argumentative laws are a far cry from the rules of standard logic. Before saying more about the law of inversion and its appli- cations, let me say something about the notion of the comparative strength of argu- ments, which, as A & D (1983 : 105) note, is basic to AT. According to A & D (1976: 15), u is a stronger argument than u™in favour of c if a speaker who uses U™ as an argument for c would also have to admit u as an argu- ment for c, but not vice versa. For example, (20) could be seen as a stronger argu- ment in favour of (21) than (19), because, intuitively, a speaker accepting (19) as an argument for (21) would also have to accept (20) as an argument for the same con- clusion.* Conversely, a speaker accepting (20) as an argument for (21) would not necessarily have to admit (19). (19) Jane has a sore throat. U™ (20) Jane has pneumonia. u (21) Jane can™t sit the exam this afternoon. c (= c™j This explains the notion of argumentative strength for utterances supporting the same conclusion. Examples (19)-(21) can also be used to show that the law of inversion states something intuitively correct in cases where u and U™ are arguments for the same conclusion. Let (20) be U, (19) U™ and (21) both c and c™. Now, it has been shown above that (20) is a stronger argument in favour of (21) than (19). According to the law of inversion, the negation of (19) should therefore be a stronger argument for the 8 As will be discussed below, there are counterarguments, which pose a problem for this definition of comparative argumentative strength (and other central AT notions) and which led A & D (1983: 163-179) to adjust their definitions. C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 613 negation of (21) than is the negation of (20). The negations of (19)-(21) are given in (22)-(24). (22) Jane doesn™t have a sore throat. not-u™ (23) Jane doesn™t have pneumonia. not-u (24) Jane can sit the exam this afternoon. not-c = not-c™ Intuitively, the law of inversion makes the right prediction in this case. (22) does indeed seem to be a stronger argument than (23) in favour of (24): a speaker who accepts that the fact that Jane doesn™t have pneumonia is an argument in favour of her being able to sit an exam that afternoon will also have to accept Jane™s not hav- ing a sore throat as an argument for the same conclusion. However, someone accept- ing Jane™s not having a sore throat as an argument for Jane™s being able to sit an exam will not necessarily have to accept Jane™s not having pneumonia as an argu- ment for the same conclusion. After all, Jane could have a heavy cold, a state of affairs compatible with her not having pneumonia, which would nevertheless be an argument for her not sitting the exam. This seems to show that, intuitively, the law of inversion is right for cases where c = c™. However, the law of inversion is also supposed to apply to cases where two utterances are arguments for different conclu- sions. The problem with this is that A & D do not make it clear how their notion of argumentative strength applies to utterances that are arguments for different conclu- sions.9 All they do is give an example of a case where c and c™are not identical but opposites. According to A & D (1983: 107), the but in (25) is scalar in nature, i.e. it not only indicates that the two clauses (p and q) support contradictory conclusions (or have opposite argumentative orientations) but it also indicates that q (Peter has cleared the table) is a stronger argument for c (Peter is quite helpful) than p (Peter didn™t do the dishes) is for not-c (Peter isn™t helpful). (25) (Peter is quite helpful),: (he didn™t do the dishes),, but (he cleared the table),. If this is correct, the law of inversion should be applicable to p and q and c and not- c, i.e. not-p should be a stronger argument for not-not-c (= c) than not-q is for not-c. Therefore, it should be possible to construct an acceptable utterance of the form ‚not- not-c (= c): not-q but not-p™. As (26) shows, this is indeed possible. (26) (Peter is quite helpful),: (he didn™t clear the table)no,_q but (he did the dishes),,I_p. Anscombre and Ducrot (1983: 107-109) contrast this with (27), where, according to them, but is not scalar in nature and where, consequently, an utterance of the form ‚not-not-c (= c): not-q but not-p™ would not be acceptable to a speaker uttering (27) as (28) shows. 9 In fact, this oversight is not redressed in later definitions 614 C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 (27) (I like Peter),: (his manners are bad), but (his intentions are good),. (28) (I like Peter),.: (his intentions are bad)not_q but (his manners are good),,l.p. Thus, A & D argue, in cases of scalar but, like the one in (25), an utterance of ‚p but 4™ supports the conclusion q supports because q is a stronger argument for c than p is for not-c. In cases of non-scalar but, like the one in (27), on the other hand, this is supposed to be because the speaker gives more importance to q than she does to p.‚O Now, let™s look at the formal use of the law of inversion. A & D (1983: 110-l 11) use (29) to show how the law of inversion, this time for- mulated at the level of contents, works formally. (29) Peter is wrong to believe that he is taller than Mary and even that he is as tall. In fact, they don™t actually give the formal version of the law of inversion, but it seems plausible that, analogous to the law of negation, this law for contents would look something like (30). (30) Law of Inversion: If c,, c2 and c3 are contents and a deep structure has the content c4: [c, is a stronger argument than c2 for c,], then this can be rewritten as [not-c* is a stronger argument than not-c, for not-c,].ﬂ Before looking at its application to (29), a word needs to be said about A & D™s analysis of even. According to them (1983: 105), even in an utterance of the form ‚p and even q™ indicates that p and q support the same conclusion and that the speaker sees q as a stronger argument than p for that conclusion. Thus, A & D™s prediction is that Peter is wrong to believe that he is as tall as Mary is a stronger argument than Peter is wrong to believe that he is taller than Mary for some conclusion c which they both support, because, otherwise, (29) would not be felicitous. As has been shown above, (1 l), the second conjunct of (29), has the asserted con- tent c1 and the argumentative presupposed content p, given in (16). (11) Peter is wrong to believe that he™s as tall as Mary. (16) a: [Peter™s height doesn™t equal Mary™s height] pi: [[Peter™s height equals Mary™s height] and [Peter is tall] have the same argumentative orientation] Without going into the question in more detail, A & D (1983: 110) state that (31), has the asserted content a™ and the presupposed content b™in (31). lo In fact, it seems doubtful to me that the difference between (25) and (27) lies in the fact that but doesn™t have the same meaning in the two utterances. It seems far more likely that the difference simply lies in the informational content of the two utterances. ‚I Note that this only covers the case where both arguments support the same conclusion. Since these are the only cases A & D discuss in any detail, this version of the law of inversion seems sufficient. C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 615 (31) Peter is taller than Mary. (32) a™: [Peter™s height > Mary™s height] b™: [[Peter™s height > Mary™s height] and [Peter is tall] have the same argu- mentative orientation] If this is combined with what was said above about the contents of ‚X is wrong to believe that P™, (33), the first conjunct of (29), can now be assigned the asserted con- tent a™ and the argumentative presupposed content pi™ in (34). (33) Peter is wrong to believe that he is taller than Mary. (34) a™: T[Peter™s height > Mary™s height] p,‚: [[Peter™s height > Mary™s height] and [Peter is tall] have the same argu- mentative orientation] At this point A & D make use of an axiom of the second mechanism, which states that if [x > y] and [x = y] are two contents that are arguments for the same conclu- sion, then [x > y] is always the stronger argument than [x = y]. If one applies this axiom to the contents of (11) and (33), the two conjuncts of (29), (29) can be assigned the argumentative content y in (35). (35) y: [[Peter™s height > Mary™s height] is a stronger argument than [Peter™s height = Mary™s height] Now the law of inversion can be applied to (35) to yield (36). (36) y™: [T[Peter™s height = Mary™s height] is a stronger argument than T[Peter™s height > Mary™s height] The third mechanism, which assigns argumentative relations to deep structures (rather than contents), contains the law in (37),‚* which explains the use of even (A & D, 1983: 111). (37) If A and A™ are two deep structures with the asserted co-oriented contents a and a™ respectively and the second mechanism derives from the conjunction of A and A™ the argumentative content [a is a stronger argument than a™], then A and A™ have the same argumentative orientation and A is stronger than A™. This means that it follows from (36) that (11) and (33), the two conjuncts of (29), have the same argumentative orientation and that (11) is a stronger argument than (33), which explains why the use of even in (29) is felicitous. ‚* It is not entirely clear what the motivation of this law is, apart from the fact that it is needed to account for these examples. In general, there seems to be a proliferation of laws and axioms in AT at this stage, whose motivation is not always clear. 676 C. Iten I Lingua I10 (2000) 665499 3.5. A counterexample and some revised definitions As mentioned in note above, A & D (1976)‚s definition of comparative argumen- tative strength runs into counterexamples. A & D (1983: 164-166) discuss the fol- lowing case. On their original definition, u2 is a stronger argument than uI for some conclusion c if a speaker who accepts U, as an argument for c also has to accept u2, but not vice versa. One of the examples A & D use is the utterance pair in (38). The original AT account of the meaning of nearly (presque) states that the word indicates that an utterance containing it has the same argumentative orientation (i.e. supports the same types of conclusion) as the corresponding utterance without nearly and that p is a stronger argument than nearly p. In other words, if the AT account of nearly is correct, (38b) should be a stronger argument than (38a) for the same type of con- clusion. l3 (38) a. The barrel is nearly empty. u, b. The barrel is empty. u2 (adapted from A & D, 1983: 164) It seems clear that, on A & D™s definition, (38b) is indeed a stronger argument than (38a) for a conclusion like (39), for example: Any speaker who accepts that (38a) is an argument for (39) will also have to accept that (38b) is an argument for the same conclusion, but not vice versa. (39) We need to get a fresh barrel. However, as A & D (1983: 164) point out, if the conclusion were not (39) but some- thing like (40), their definition of the notion of stronger argument would not apply. (40) We need to drink just a little more. (adapted from A & D, 1983: 164) As (41a) and (41b) show, it is not the case that any speaker who accepts (38a) as an argument for (40) also has to accept (38b); for (38b) isn™t an argument for (40) at all. (41) a. The barrel is nearly empty. So, we need to drink just a little more. b. The barrel is empty. So, we need to drink just a little more. The existence of examples like (41a) and (41b) means that A & D™s definition of argumentative orientation and stronger argument and their account of the meaning of nearly cannot all be right. At this stage A & D (1983: 166) change their definitions of argumentative orientation and argumentative strength. However, as will be seen in I3 NB. There is, of course, a truth-conditional difference between (38a) and (38b). However, A & D (1983: 165) don™t want their explanation to hinge on this, because they™re already moving towards aban- doning truth conditions and they certainly don™t want the truth conditions of an utterance to take prior- ity over its argumentative properties. C. Iten /Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 671 the next section, at a later stage their definitions, and the account of the meaning of words like nearly,14 underwent some changes of a more far-reaching sort. A & D™s first step in changing the definition of argumentative strength is the introduction of a new distinction, between argumentation and the act of arguing (A & D, 1983: 163-166). According to A & D (1983: 163) an argumentation is a dis- course with at least two utterances u1 and u2, one of which is the premise (or argu- ment) and the other the conclusion. An act of arguing, on the other hand, is an illo- cutionary acti which is part of the meaning of every utterance, whether it is used as a premise or as a conclusion in a given argumentation. This act consists in attribut- ing a certain degree of a certain property (e.g. tallness, helpfulness, emptiness, etc.) to one or more entities or objects. This, according to A & D (1983: 166), is part of the meaning of the utterance in the sense that the utterance ‚presents itself™ as accomplishing such an act. The idea is that the kind of property a given utterance is taken to attribute to an object on a given occasion determines the kind of conclusion in favour of which the utterance can be used. In their new definition of argumentative strength, A & D make use of this notion of act of arguing. Instead of defining argumentative strength and argumentative ori- entation in terms of conclusions, they now define them in terms of the properties the utterances attribute to objects and the degrees to which they do so. On A & D (1983: 167)‚s new definition, two utterances have the same argumentative orientation if they attribute the same property to the same objectsi They have opposite argumen- tative orientations if they don™t, to any degree, attribute the same property to the same objects.17 A & D (1983 : 166)‚s new definition of argumentative strength is the I4 See Moeschler and Reboul(l994: 320-321). I5 The fact that Ducrot (1984) states in the preface that he studied and was influenced by the works of Austin and Searle, might lead one to assume that A & D™s notion of illocutionary act is identical to that of Austin (1962) or Searle (1969, 1979), i.e. an act performed in speaking, such as warning, requesting, promising, etc. However, it is not entirely clear that A & D™s notion is the same. At the very least, the illocutionary act of arguing is different from all other illocutionary acts in that it is supposed to be per- formed by every single utterance. I6 This might make it look as though (1) and (2) have the same argumentative orientation, because they seem to attribute the same property to the same entity, i.e. they both seem to attribute height to Peter. However, A & D would be likely to say that as tall as attributes tallness, whereas the same heighf as can attribute tallness or shortness. This highlights a general worry about what a property is on this picture, i.e. why are tallness and shortness different properties? Similarly, it isn™t clear why there couldn™t be a property of near-emptiness, which would mean that (38a) and (38b) don™t attribute the same property to the same object - one could attribute emptiness and the other near-emptiness. I7 This change in the definition of opposite argumentative orientation has an undesirable effect on A SC D™s account of the meaning of but. Remember that it was a necessary (and, in the case of non-scalar but, also sufficient) condition of the felicitous use of but that the two conjuncts should have opposite argu- mentative orientation without contradicting each other. When argumentative orientation was defined in terms of conclusions and two utterances were said to have opposite argumentative orientation if they supported opposite conclusions, (i) would have been ruled out, because it is hard to see what opposite conclusions could be supported by Peter likes chocolate and Most birds can fly. (i) ?Peter likes chocolate but most birds can fly. However, given A & D™s new definition of opposite argumentative orientation, (i) should be acceptable, because the two conjuncts do indeed not attribute the same property to the same object to any degree whatsoever and the two conjuncts certainly don™t contradict each other. 678 C. lten I Lingua 1 IO (2000) 665499 following: u2 is a stronger argument than uI if they both present their object as pos- sessing the same property R and u2 indicates a higher degree than u,. In those cases where ul and u2 support the same conclusion, u2 will do so more strongly than ulr but the definition of argumentative strength no longer demands that they should support the same conclusion, because the definition of argumentative orientation is no longer given in terms of conclusions.18 This solves the problem posed by (41a) and (41b) without a change in the account of nearly, because even in those examples (38b), the barrel is empty, attributes a greater degree of emptiness to the barrel than does (38a), the barrel is nearly empty, and, therefore, (38a) and (38b) have the same argumen- tative orientation and (38b) is a stronger argument than (38a) on the new definitions. It™s just that in (41a) and (41b) the two utterances can™t support the same conclusion. It will become clear below that this change is the first step in the direction of topoi and topical forms. 4. Argumentative operators, topoi, topical forms and topical fields 4.1. Argumentative operators In argumentation theory, expressions like as . . . as, nearly, but and many others are referred to as ‚argumentative operators™ (e.g. Nyan, 1998: 52).19 As the discus- sion above may have made clear, these argumentative operators can be seen as deter- mining the argumentative orientation, or constraining the argumentative potential, of utterances. Thus, the presence of as tall as in (2) had the effect of adding the (argu- mentative) presupposed content (lob) to the meaning of the utterance. (1) on the other hand, which has the same asserted content as (2), but doesn™t contain as tall as, doesn™t carry this presupposed content. (1) Peter is the same height as Mary. (2) Peter is as tall as Mary. Similarly, nearly in (38a) has been analysed as determining the argumentative ori- entation of its host utterance, in that it indicates that an utterance containing it has the same argumentative orientation as a corresponding utterance without nearly. This would be a banal observation if it wasn™t for the fact that, from the point of view of informational content, ‚nearly X™ is equivalent to ‚not X™. This is made even more interesting by the fact that the argumentative orientation of an utterance con- ix It™s interesting that, by this stage, A & D seem to have given up (or at least forgotten) the idea that different degrees of argumentative strength can also be attributed to arguments with different argumen- tative orientations (as allowed for by the law of inversion). If the new definition of argumentative strength given here is the whole story, A & D can no longer claim that there is such a thing as the scalar but discussed above - the law of inversion will no longer be applicable in cases where two utterances don™t attribute the same property to their objects, because the notion of argumentative strength only applies to utterances that attribute the same property. I9 Nyan also uses the term ‚metalinguistic operator™. C. Item I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 679 taining barely, e.g. (42), is the opposite of that of the same utterance without barely, e.g. (38b), in spite of the fact that ‚barely X™ is informationally equivalent to ‚X™. (38) a. The barrel is nearly empty. b. The barrel is empty. (42) The barrel is barely empty. While (38a) and (38b) support the conclusion in (39) (42) can, in the same context, only be used to support its negation, (43). (39) We need to get a fresh barrel. (43) We don™t need to get a fresh barrel. However, Nyan (1998: 52-53) shows that there are examples where there is an argu- mentative operator present but the operator doesn™t seem to affect the argumentative orientation of the utterance.20 (44) It™s eight o™clock. (45) It™s only eight o™clock. (44) and (45) could be said to have the same factual (or truth-conditional) content. However, (45) contains the argumentative operator only, while (44) doesn™t. Given what was said above about argumentative operators constraining the argumentative orientation of the utterance containing them, one would expect (44) to be capable of being used as an argument in favour of some conclusions for which (45) cannot be used. However, Nyan claims that (46a) and (46b) and (47a) and (47b) show that both (44) and (45) can be used as arguments in favour of hurry up or take your time. In other words, both (44) and (45) are neutral from the point of view of argumentative orientation. Thus, the presence of only in (45) doesn™t seem to make a difference to the utterance™s argumentative potential. (46) a. Hurry up: it™s eight o™clock. b. Take your time: it™s eight o™clock. (47) a. Hurry up: it™s only eight o™clock. b. Take your time: it™s only eight o™clock. As a matter of fact, at first glance, (47a) does not look terribly acceptable. However, if a suitable context is set up, it becomes perfectly acceptable. Imagine for example that Peter and Mary are going to a concert which starts at half past eight and it takes them twenty minutes to get there. Peter is not quite ready and has started slowing down, believing that it™s quarter past eight and too late for them to make the first half of the concert. In this context it seems perfectly natural for Mary to utter (47a). As 2o In fact, it™s unclear whether it does or doesn™t on the definition of argumentative orientation dis- cussed in 3.5, because it isn™t clear what property (44) and (45) attribute to what object. 680 C. Iten / Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 this shows, the presence of only in (45) doesn™t necessarily make a difference to the range of conclusions that can be reached on its basis. Nevertheless, A & D feel that only does make a difference to the argumentative content of (45). The notions of ‚topos™ (based on Aristotle™s notion) and ‚topical form™ were introduced to capture the difference in argumentative content between (44) and (45). These notions take further the ideas behind the new definitions discussed in 3.5. 4.2. Topoi and topical forms According to Moeschler and Reboul(1994: 317-322) and Nyan (1998: 52-59), a topos is an argumentative rule shared by a given community (which need have no more members than the speaker and the hearer). This argumentative rule is used to license the move from an argument to a conclusion. It is an important feature of topoi that they are scalar in nature. The general form of a topos is given in (48). (48) The more/less object 0 possesses property P, the more/less object 0™ possesses property P™. As Moeschler and Reboul (1994: 317) point out, if one assumes that proposition A = ‚object 0 possesses property P™ and proposition B = ‚object 0™ possesses property Pﬂ, then a topos can have the four forms in (49a-d), with (49a) reading ‚the more 0 is P, the more 0™ is Pﬂ, (49b) ‚the less 0 is P, the less 0™ is Pﬂ, and so on. (49) a. <+A, +B> b. <-A, -B> c. <+A, -B> d. <-A, +B> If we assume that A is something like ‚the weather is warm™ and B ‚the beach will be pleasant™, the four possible topical forms will be something like (50a-d). (50) a. (The warmer the weather)+,, (the more pleasant the beach)+,. b. (The colder the weather)_,, (the less pleasant the beach)_,. c. (The warmer the weather)+,, (the less pleasant the beach)_,. d. (The colder the weather)_,, (the more pleasant the beach)+,. As (50) illustrates, there are two incompatible underlying topoi to each set of topical forms. Thus, a speaker who accepts (50a) (or 49a in the general case) will also have to accept (50b) (or 49b), but she will not be able to accept (50~) or (50d) (or 49c or 49d). In Anscombre and Ducrot (1989: 83)‚s terminology (49a) and (49b) are ‚con- verse™ topoi (topoi inverses), as are (49~) and (49d). Nyan (1998: 55) refers to the topos underlying (50~) and (50d) (49~ and 49d in the general case) as ‚the converse topos™. Moeschler and Reboul (1994: 3 17) use the expression ‚contrary topoi™ (topoi contraires) to refer to the two incompatible topoi underlying (49a-b) and (49c-d) respectively. To avoid confusion I™ll refer to incompatible topoi as contrary topoi. C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 681 Different sequences from argument to conclusion will be licensed by different topoi. Let us call the topos underlying (50a) and (50b) Tl and the topos underlying (50~) and (50d) T2. In that case, the sequences in (51) and (52) will be licensed by Tl, while those in (53) and (54) will be licensed by T2. (51) It™s warm. Let™s go to the beach. (52) It™s not warm. Let™s not go to the beach. (53) It™s warm. Let™s not go to the beach. (54) It™s not warm. Let™s go to the beach. So, how do the notions of topos and topical form solve the problem that examples (47a) and (47b) present for the argumentative operator only? Recall that the curious thing about (47a) and (47b) is that the presence of the argumentative operator only doesn™t seem to make a difference to the argumentative potential of its host utterance, since both (47a) and (47b) are acceptable, just like their operator-free counterparts (46a) and (46b). (46) a. Hurry up: it™s eight o™clock. b. Take your time: it™s eight o™clock. (47) a. Hurry up: it™s only eight o™clock. b. Take your time: it™s only eight o™clock. Let us first look at the different topical forms underlying the sequences in (46) and (47). They are given as TFl-TF4 in (55). (55) TFl: The more time one has, the more one needs to hurry. TF2: The less time one has, the less one needs to hurry. TF3: The more time one has, the less one needs to hurry. TF4: The less time one has, the more one needs to hurry. The interesting thing now is that (46) and (47) cannot both be licensed by the same set of topical forms. (46a) can be licensed by TFl or TF4 and (46b) by TF2 or TF3. In other words, the argument it™s eight o™clock can lead to the conclusion hurry up via two different routes and the same goes for the conclusion take your time. This is illustrated in Fig. 1. TF3 Fig. 1. (adapted from Moeschler and Reboul, 1994: 3 19) 682 C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 The case of (47) however, is different. (47a) can only be licensed by TFl and (47b) only by TF3. Thus, as illustrated in Fig. 2, the presence of the argumentative opera- tor may not restrict the class of conclusions reached but it does restrict the route taken to reach those conclusions. TFl ____---- _,PurrY UP It™s eight o™clock _________-.rr======~tr______ --__ -‚*Take your time TF3 Fig. 2. (adapted from Moeschler and Reboul, 1994: 3 19) 4.3. Topical fields The introduction of topical forms means that A & D (e.g. 1989) no longer want to capture the meaning of utterances in terms of asserted and presupposed contents assigned to deep structures. Rather they see the meaning of the deep structure as ﬁthe set of topoi whose application is said to be valid when utteredﬂ (A & D, 1989: 80). They (1989: 81) describe linguistic predicates as bundles of topoi and they introduce the notion of topical field for networks of topoi.21 Thus, the meaning of a predicate like work, for example, is given by a bundle of topoi involving gradations of work. Some topoi that could be part of the meaning of work are given in (56). (56) a. The more work, the more success. b. The less work, the more relaxation. c. The more work, the more fatigue. d. The less work, the more happiness.** *r As they put it: ﬁA sort of topical field is then substituted for the usual lexical fieldﬂ (A & D, 1989: 81). I assume that what is meant by ‚the usual lexical field™ is the neo-Saussurean notion, discussed, for example in Lyons (1977: 25&261), i.e. a structured collection of lexemes which cover a conceptual field, e.g. that of colours or ‚knowledge and understanding™. 22 As a matter of fact, not only these topoi are linked with work, but also their opposites, i.e. ‚the less work, the more success™, ‚the more work, the more relaxation™, ‚the less work, the more fatigue™, etc. This makes the AT conception of meaning seem somewhat bizarre, as the meaning of the predicate work contains contradictory parts. What is more, the information given by the topoi looks much more like world knowledge than linguistic knowledge and it is not clear that world knowledge should or could be part of linguistic meaning. C. Iten I Linguu 110 (2000) 665499 683 Another way of looking at this would be to say that gradations of work are linked, via different topoi, with a series of other gradations, e.g. of success, relaxation, fatigue and happiness. These gradations, in turn, are themselves linked to different gradations still. For instance, gradations of happiness could be linked with grada- tions of health, appetite, etc. This network of gradations, linked via an infinite num- ber of topoi, is what A & D (1989: 81) mean by a topical field. It is interesting to note at this point that A & D (1989: 82) ﬁin no way claim that all individuals of the same linguistic community share the same topical field, nor even that a given individual always uses the same oneﬂ. This seems to raise the question as to whether any linguistic predicate can ever have a meaning stable across a linguistic community (and even for the same individual across time). Unfortu- nately, A & D do not discuss this point. Obviously, these developments of AT bring with them accounts of examples, like (2), that are quite different from the accounts given in earlier AT. (2) Peter is as tall as Mary. On their revised account of (2), 23 Anscombre and Ducrot (1989: 83-85) analyse the deep structure underlying the utterance as requiring that Peter and Mary should be located at the same degree of the initial gradation of tallness in all topoi that link tall- ness with other gradations, like for instance ‚the taller, the better at basketball™, ‚the taller, the more clumsy™, etc. In other words, it is part of the meaning of (2) that any conclusion that can be drawn from Mary™s location on the scale of tallness can also be drawn from Peter™s location on the same scale and vice versa. Probably the most important aspect of the move from asserted and presupposed contents to topical fields is the fact that it is also a move from a semantics with some truth-conditional (i.e. asserted contents) and some non-truth-conditional elements (i.e. argumentative presupposed contents) to one which is wholly non-truth-condi- tional. As will be seen in the next section, this move is highly questionable and cre- ates some very serious problems for AT. 4.4. New definitions of central AT notions The introduction of topoi and topical form to replace the idea that the meaning of utterances can be captured in terms of the conclusions for which they can be used as arguments means that the definitions of the central notions of AT, such as argumen- tative orientation and argumentative force, given in previous sections can no longer be correct. It is therefore remarkable that nowhere in A & D™s work (as much of it as is available to me at least) have I been able to find any explicit reformulations of the basic AT definitions. Because it seems important to have at least some idea of how A & D would (or could) now define the notions of argumentative orientation and argumentative strength, I will attempt a guess on the basis of their slightly revised definitions discussed in 3.5. *™ Presumably, the same would hold for (1). 684 C. lten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 Where in A & D (1983: 167) they said two utterances would have opposite argu- mentative orientations if they didn™t attribute the same property to the same object to any degree whatsoever, it seems possible that they™d now say that two utterances have opposite argumentative orientations if they are linked to topoi with different initial gradations and, maybe, converse second gradations, like for example T and T™ in (57). (57) T: The nicer the weather, the more pleasant a walk. T™: The more work one has to do, the less pleasant a walk. Now, T could be seen as underlying the first conjunct in (58) and T™ the second, and indeed, since but can felicitously link the two conjuncts in (58), they would have been said to have opposite argumentative orientations on A & D™s old defin- itions. (58) The weather is nice, but I have a lot of work to do. It™s a little less hard to see how the notion of argumentative strength would be defined now. In A & D (1983: 166), they say that an utterance u2 will be argumen- tatively stronger than utterance U, if they both attribute the same property to the same object and if u2 does so to a greater degree than u,. The only way I can see in which this could be translated into terms of topical forms is that u2 will be argumen- tatively stronger than uI if u2 places its object higher than u2 on the initial gradation of all topoi linked with the utterances. Thus, (59b) will be stronger than (59a), because the former places its object (i.e. the weather) higher on the gradation of niceness than the latter. (59) a. The weather is nice. b. The weather is very nice. 5. The end of informational contents 5.1. Introduction As mentioned above, Anscombre and Ducrot (1989) constitutes a move away from the earlier AT position where argumentative contents were seen as an integral part of the semantic structure of the deep structures underlying utterances, but not the only kind of content; informational or truth-conditional (asserted or factual) con- tents were also part of the semantic structure of utterances. In their own words, A & D (1989: 77-79) move from a position of considering ‚argumentation as a compo- nent of meaning™ to one of ‚radical argumentativism™. As will be seen shortly, this move has some very far-reaching and ultimately, I believe, undesirable implications. However, first of all, let us look at the justification A & D (1983, 1989), and espe- cially Ducrot (1993), give for this move. C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 685 5.2. Ascriptivism The idea that the argumentative function of language, and thus the argumentative aspects of linguistic meaning, should be seen as primary first seems to emerge in chapter 7 of A & D (1983). In this chapter, A & D (1983: 169) say that, even though so far their accounts had made it look as though they saw language as having two separate functions, namely an informative one and an argumentative one, they really want to work towards a position where the argumentative function of language, and with it argumentative meaning, is primary and the informative function of language secondary. In that sort of an account, any informational (or truth-conditional) mean- ing would be derived from an underlying argumentative meaning. The wish to give such an account seems to stem from the view that many utterances, like for example those in (60)-(62) below, which look as if they are purely informative, i.e. as if they describe some objective state of affairs or other, do not, in fact, describe any such state of affairs. (60) Peter is intelligent. (61) This hotel is good. (62) This act is voluntary. A & D (1983: 169-174) maintain that the assumption that, for example (60), is a description which predicates the objective property ‚intelligent™ of Peter is wrong. This, they say, would presuppose that there is a state of affairs in the world which would make (60) true or false, and that there is an objective concept ‚intelligent™. A & D believe that there is no such concept, or, if there is a scientific concept, for example based on the notion of IQ, that concept would not capture the meaning of the natural language word intelligent. Instead, A & D (1983: 170) want to follow in the footsteps of ‚ascriptivists™, like Hare (1952) who would account for the meaning of (60) by saying that it is used to praise Peter, the meaning of (61) by saying that it is used to recommend the hotel, and the meaning of (62) by saying that it is used to attribute responsibility for the act to the agent. A & D (1983: 172)‚s account, though in the same spirit as the ascriptivist view, is slightly different. They suggest that utterances like (60)-(62) should be accounted for in purely argumentative terms. That is, according to them, the meaning of (61), for example, should be captured by saying that the utterance can be used as an argu- ment in favour of a conclusion r, with r being something like ‚favourable view of the hotel™.24 There are two potential problems with this, both of which have been used as arguments against ascriptivism (see e.g. Searle, 1969: 136-141; Geach, 1972: 250-269). The first problem is that it is very easily possible to utter something like (61) without recommending the hotel. Thus, (63) is perfectly acceptable. M This shows that A & D started thinking about abandoning informational contents before they™d intro- duced the notions of topoi and topical forms, at a time when they still defined the central AT notions in terms of conclusions, rather than topoi. 686 C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 (63) This hotel is good, but I don™t recommend it. A & D (1983: 172) avoid this problem by saying that it is the meaning of (61) that it can be used as an argument for a favourable view of the hotel, which does not mean that it actually always has to lead to that kind of conclusion. In fact, they argue that the very presence of but in (63) indicates that the two conjuncts are arguments for opposite conclusions25 and that this supports their view. The second, graver, problem is that utterances like (61) can be used in syllogisms, like the one in (64). (64) a. If this hotel is good, it is expensive. b. This hotel is good. c. Therefore, it is expensive. (A & D, 1983: 172) The problematic point here is the conditional in (64a). It seems unlikely that the meaning of the antecedent here can be captured by saying that it is an argument for a favourable view of the hotel (or that it is used to recommend the hotel). However, if the meaning of the antecedent is different from that of (64b), the argument can™t go through. Anscombre and Ducrot (1983: 173) offer a solution involving the notion of ‚delocutivity™ (ddocutivite™). An expression E, is derived from an expression E, via delocutivity if the form of E, is based on that of E, but the meaning of E2 is based, not on the encoded meaning of El (i.e. its semantic value), but on some prag- matic value connected with the utterance of E,. A & D now maintain that there is an E,: X is good which attributes a certain prop- erty to X and which is derived, via delocutivity, from an E,: X is good which has as its meaning that it is an argument for a favourable view of X. According to them, a general law of discourse states that any utterance which is used to argue for some- thing presents itself as being justified by a property of the object with which the argumentation is concerned. After all, A & D believe, if one takes the trouble to argue for a favourable view of an object, then this object must have certain proper- ties which justify the argument. It is this ‚pragmatic™ aspect of the utterance of E, : X is good that gets transferred to the expression E,: X is good. The idea is now that syl- logisms, like the one in (64), contain expression E,, which does attribute a property to an object, and not E,, from which E2 is derived. Before moving on, let me point out some difficulties with this account. A major worry, which will no doubt have struck the reader, is that the delocutiv- ity account of is good is completely counter-intuitive. It seems odd, to say the least, that the is good that attributes a property to objects is derived from the is good that is an argument for a favourable view, rather than the other way around. From a more theoretical point of view, there are two ways of construing A & D™s account. The first is that they are saying that is good has just one meaning (i.e. that it has a uni- tary semantics), namely that the utterance is an argument for a favourable view of its 25 See note 24. C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 687 object(s), and that the delocutive meaning has to be derived (pragmatically) on cer- tain occasions. The problem with this is that the delocutive meaning will have to be derived on many occasions. What is more, it isn™t clear how the meaning of good in utterances like (65) could be accounted for. (65) Good hotels are hard to come by. It seems obvious that it isn™t part of the meaning of (65) that it is an argument for a favourable view of the hotel, but it isn™t clear how a hearer could work out on the basis of (65) that good here attributes a certain property to an object if that isn™t part of the meaning of good. The second way of construing A & D™s delocutivity account is that it amounts to the postulation of an ambiguity in is good. However, this is completely unnecessary, because, if the meaning of is good were assumed to be that it attributes certain pos- itive properties to objects, it would fall out quite naturally that an utterance contain- ing such an attribution is often an argument for a favourable view of the objects. Admittedly, there is still a question about what property exactly it is that is good does attribute - a possible answer to this will be discussed in the final section. In spite of the fact that A & D (1983, ch. 7) say they want to move towards a completely non-truth-conditional semantics, which is based on the view that no meaning is primarily descriptive or informational, they (1983 : 169) admit that there are a number of utterances, like for example (66)-(68), which seem to be irreducibly informative, and for which they can™t account in purely argumentative terms. (66) The table is square. (67) The tablecloth is red. (68) Peter has arrived. (A & D, 1983: 169) As a matter of fact, it™s less than obvious that (66)-(68) are radically different from (60)-(62). What counts as square and what as red varies across circumstances, pur- poses and individuals, so that the property communicated by utterances such as (66) and (67) is no more fixed or objective than the properties communicated by intelli- gent, good and voluntary.26 5.3. Radical argumentativism 5.3.1 Examples Ducrot (1993: 88) goes further than A & D (1983) in his rejection of truth-condi- tional meaning. He maintains that no part of meaning is purely objective, i.e. not touched by any, as Ducrot puts it, ‚pragmatic intentions™ (intentions pragmatiques). Note, though, that the examples Ducrot (1993: 89) uses are very close to (60~(62), the examples used by A & D (1983) to show that some utterances could be 26 See note 33. 688 C. Ilen I Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 accounted for in purely argumentative terms, but not to (66)-(68), the examples A & D (1983) give of purely informative utterances. In other words, Ducrot does not address the examples that one would expect to be addressed by someone making the ‚no objectivity™ claim. The first set of Ducrot™s examples are given in (69) and (70). (69) The film was interesting. (70) The meeting was pleasant. As with (60)-(62), the argument is that there simply are no objective properties ‚interesting™ or ‚pleasant™ and that, therefore, it is impossible to capture the meaning of (69) and (70) in truth-conditional terms. From this, Ducrot (1993: 89) concludes that the meaning of these two utterances must be given in purely argumentative terms. As will be discussed below, I don™t believe that the move from the assumption that the meaning of a certain expression is not an objective (fixed, determinate) concept to the assumption that it must be non-truth-conditional (or, at least, that there is no state of affairs corresponding to the concept conveyed by the expression on a given occa- sion) is legitimate. Nor do I believe that the move from the assumption that the mean- ing of a certain expression is non-truth-conditional to the assumption that it must be argumentative is acceptable. Nevertheless, the point that there is no single objective property ‚interesting™ or single property ‚pleasant™ is valid and any account of the meaning of words like interesting and pleasant will have to take this into account. Ducrot™s next two examples, also intended to demonstrate the impossibility of giving truth conditions to utterances, require a greater leap of the imagination. The first one of these is given in (71), uttered by a parent to a child who is getting a bit too close to a dog. (71) Don™t touch: it™s dirty. Ducrot (1993: 89) is interested in the indicative it™s dirty. He claims that the mean- ing of this is not, as one might expect, that it gives a description of the dog, but rather that it is an argument for not touching it. Ducrot starts by saying that for the child, it™s dirty can™t be a description of the dog, because the child doesn™t know anything about the adjective dirty, other than that it is used as a justification for orders not to touch, not to eat, or, more generally, to stay away from things. He admits that the parent uttering (71), will see it™s dirty as a description of the dog which is part of an argument with the conclusion don™t touch. However, Ducrot believes that this is an illusion, because the parents would find it difficult to define dirtiness in terms which don™t allude to the fact that it justifies forbidding things. The final example Ducrot (1993 : 89) uses is (72), which should be imagined as uttered by a speaker who is trying to get the hearer to do something. (72) Be reasonable. Ducrot believes that (72) is not a case of a proposition (the hearer is reasonable) being uttered with directive illocutionary force as the standard speech act account C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 689 would have it (e.g. Searle, 1979). According to Ducrot, the semantic value of the adjective reasonable consists in the fact that it presents an act as one that must be performed. In other words, for Ducrot (1993: 89-90), the meaning of reasonable is purely argumentative; the word does not encode a propositional constituent. His jus- tification is that he can™t see what propositional constituent that could be. Ducrot™s accounts of is dirty in (71) and be reasonable in (72) are both incredibly counterintuitive. I, for one, have no difficulty at all in thinking of a definition of dirt- iness which has absolutely nothing to do with forbidding things. In fact, a quick glance at any dictionary of English (or French, or any other language with a word corresponding to dirty) will show that there are numerous definitions of dirtiness which don™t have anything to do with forbidding things. Similarly, I can see reason- ably easily what fragment of a proposition reasonable could encode (and, again, I™m sure most dictionaries would be on my side). Furthermore, if the meaning of be rea- sonable is described exhaustively by saying that it describes acts as ones that must be performed, what is the meaning of an utterance like (73)? (73) Susan has always tried to be reasonable. To return to Ducrot, after using the examples discussed above to argue against a truth-based semantics, he goes on to state how a purely argumentative semantics could work. For this, he uses the notion of topos introduced above, and the notion of polyphony, which will be discussed briefly here. 5.3.2. Polyphony Polyphony is a central notion of AT. It is based on the idea that the views of more than one person can be behind a text or utterance. This idea was first explored in lit- erary criticism, e.g. by Bakhtin. According to Ducrot (1984: 173), his own work is an extension of Bakhtin™s from literary criticism into linguistics. In what follows, a brief description of polyphony in linguistics will be given, along with some of its applications in AT. I will also mention some criticisms of Ducrot™s linguistic theory of polyphony. According to Ducrot (1993 : 90), the meaning of an utterance consists in a char- acterisation of its own uttering. This uttering is characterised as the confrontation of different ‚voices™ or ‚points of view™, which interact with each other. The idea is that the (usually unique) speaker (locuteur) doing the uttering stages a dialogue inside her own monologue between different points of view (e™nonciateurs). It is important to note that neither locuteur nor tnonciateurs are construed as real people. Rather, Moeschler and Reboul (1994: 326) stress that they are theoretical constructs, although actual people can come to be identified with locuteurs and e™nonciateurs. This notion that every utterance is a manifestation of different interacting points of view is what is referred to, in AT, by the term ‚polyphony™.27 27 For a discussion of polyphony see also Moeschler and Reboul (1994: 323-347). Nyan (1998: 6@63) and iagar (1999). 690 C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 The following are some of the linguistic phenomena which, according to Ducrot (1984) exhibit the points of view of more than one (theoretical) individual (or of someone other than the individual who is actually doing the uttering): direct and indirect reported speech, ironical utterances, utterances containing but and negative utterances. The most obvious of these are cases of reported speech, be it direct reported speech, as in (74a), indirect reported speech, as in (74b), or free direct reported speech, as in (74~). (74) What did Mary say? a. She said: ﬁI like youﬂ. b. She said she liked me. c. I like you. (74a) and (74b) clearly represent the points of view of both the actual speaker (say, Peter) and Mary. (74~) although physically uttered by Peter, actually represents Mary™s point of view. On Ducrot (1984: 210-213)‚s account, if (75) is uttered ironically, it will repre- sent not the actual speaker™s view, but somebody else™s (whether that person actually uttered the words or not and whether there actually is a specific person whose view is being expressed or not).28 (75) Life is beautiful. In an utterance containing but, the presence of two different points of view makes itself felt in a different way. Remember that A & D analyse but as indicating that the two conjuncts have opposite argumentative orientations. Thus, Peter is rich will have opposite argumentative orientation to I like him in (76). (76) Peter is rich but I like him. Remember also that, at least in earlier AT, two utterances were said to have oppo- site argumentative orientations if they were arguments for opposite conclusions. In (76) Peter is rich could, for example, be an argument for I don™t like Peter, whereas I like him clearly is an argument for I like Peter. Now, the point is that one and the same person (or theoretical individual) can™t argue for I like Peter and I don™t like Peter at one and the same time.29 Finally, negation is the simplest example of polyphony, according to Ducrot. The idea is that every utterance containing a negation involves the presentation of at least two points of view: the positive counterpart of the utterance and the negative utter- ance itself. Thus, (77), taken from Nyan (1998: 60), will be analysed as comprising the two viewpoints in (78a) and (78b). ** Ducrot™s account of irony is based on Sperber and Wilson (1978). 29 I am here deliberately reverting back to the ‚old™ AT definition of argumentative orientation, since neither Nyan (1998) nor Moeschler and Reboul (1994) give an account of but using the notions of topoi and topical form. C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 691 (77) Ludwig isn™t an ordinary dog. (78) a. Ludwig is an ordinary dog. b. Ludwig isn™t an ordinary dog. In most cases, the speaker will be seen as identifying with the viewpoint in (78b), but in cases of irony, for example, the speaker will be seen as identifying with (78a). This might be seen as a good way of accounting for the intuition that utterances con- taining negations always also make immediately accessible their positive counter- parts. The biggest problem with Ducrot™s linguistic notion of polyphony, as pointed out by Moeschler and Reboul (1994: 332-333), is that it leads to an incredible prolifer- ation of theoretical entities: not only can each utterance comprise a multitude of hzonciateurs and more than one locuteur on a basic level, but Ducrot (1984: 224) also conceives of cases where first-level thonciateurs are manipulated by higher- level e™nonciateurs. What™s more, this proliferation of theoretical entities wouldn™t be necessary if, instead, a notion were developed of real people representing other (real) people™s thoughts and utterances (or, indeed, thoughts and utterances which are not attributed to anybody in particular).30 5.3.3. Some radical consequences of radical argumentativism Overall, the picture Ducrot (1993) paints is the following. All linguistic meaning can be captured in purely argumentative terms. That is, every utterance can be described as a collection of topoi, which constitute different points of view, and there is nothing about language as such that is informative, i.e. language is not cut out to be used to describe states of affairs. As Ducrot (1993: 96) points out, this gives rise to some important questions. The first question Ducrot mentions is this: if language really does not say any- thing true or false about the world, how come speakers believe that they are using language to give true descriptions of the world (at least sometimes)? Ducrot (1993: 97)‚s answer to this question is that speakers™ (and hearers™) impression that lan- guage is informative is an illusion. The second question he raises is: given that linguists use language to describe how language works and given that that language (as assumed by Ducrot) cannot say anything about the world, how can linguists ever say anything true about language? Ducrot (1993 : 97) first notes that this question is too important and too far-reaching in its implications for it to be answered in a few words. He then considers the possi- ble answer that linguists should try to construct a metalanguage which is descriptive in nature (a logical language, such as the predicate calculus, for example). After stat- ing that this is what all linguists, including himself in the present paper, are trying to do, he says that he feels that it is an impossible task. Finally, he concludes that lin- guistics should be seen, not as a scientific discipline, but as an essentially critical one and that the aim of semantics should not be to try and describe the actual meaning of 3o Cf. Sperber and Wilson (1995: 224-231)‚s notion of interpretive use. 692 C. Iten / Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 utterances but to destroy the illusion that utterances convey information about things. In his own words: ﬁUne deuxikme issue possible est de fixer & la skmantique linguistique un objectif essentiellement cri- +ue:.[sic] Elle ne viserait pas ?I d&ire ce que signifie vraiment le discours: elle viserait seulement B dttruire l™illusion sans cesse renaissante selon laquelle le discours donnerait des informations sur les chases. Elle enseignerait avant tout ?I se mkj7er de la parole.ﬂ (Ducrot, 1993: 98, his emphasis) 6. Some pros and cons of AT, and a cognitive alternative 6.1. AT evaluated So far in this paper I have sketched the beginnings of AT, its most important developments and the point it seems to have reached at present. At each stage, I have pointed out problems with A & D™s accounts either in footnotes or in the body of the text. In this section, I would like to recapitulate some of the problems mentioned ear- lier and expand on those that have merely been hinted at. First, however, let me men- tion some of AT™s strong points. Without a doubt, a lot of good analytical work has been done within the frame- work of AT and, in its earlier forms, it is based on some interesting observations. Argumentation Theory is obviously right, and certainly not alone, in noticing the existence and the importance of non-truth-conditional aspects of linguistic meaning, and in pointing out the existence of words whose meaning is essentially subjective, like interesting, pleasant, etc. Anscombre and Ducrot™s work highlights some very interesting linguistic phenomena, such as the difference between as tall as and the same height as discussed above, the difference between little and a little discussed in A & D (1989: 82-83), and the difference between he is 36 and he is only 36 (Nyan, 1998: 52). These are all phenomena a successful semantic theory will have to account for. A & D (e.g. 1976 and 1983)‚s accounts of the meaning of but and even are particularly insightful. Finally, there is the idea, discussed for example by iagar (1999: l-2), that utterances like (44) are not usually made just to let a hearer know what time it is, but also to communicate something else, for example any of (79a-d). (44) It™s eight o™clock. (79) a. Hurry up! b. Take your time! c. Turn on the radio ! d. Go brush your teeth! (from iagar, 1999: 2) Clearly, this idea has been widely accepted by linguists and philosophers of lan- guage, at least since Grice. However, it is doubtful whether topical forms, which are part of the meaning of the deep structure underlying an utterance, are the right tool for explaining this phenomenon. Now, let me move on to some of my worries with AT. C. lten / Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 693 As argumentation theorists would no doubt be the first to agree, in AT™s earlier incarnations there were problems with specific definitions, especially those of argu- mentative potential, argumentative orientation and strength, when they were couched in terms of conclusions. Furthermore, at the stage where A & D accounted for the meaning of utterances by assigning asserted and presupposed content to their under- lying deep structures there was a proliferation of mechanisms, laws and axioms whose existence wasn™t always independently justified (for instance, the law gov- erning the use of even discussed in section 3.4). Another worry at that stage in the theory™s development was that the compositionality of the meaning of deep struc- tures was only guaranteed to the level of core deep structures, whose meaning could not be decomposed further. In other words, the contribution made by individual lex- ical items that are not argumentative operators and the syntactic structure of the sen- tence are not addressed. The intermediate step of introducing the notion of act of arguing solved some of those problems but also created some new ones, notably for A & D™s account of the meaning of but. However, it is the last step in the development of AT, namely the introduction of topoi and topical forms along with abandoning any kind of informa- tional, descriptive or truth-conditional contents, which has created the most serious problems for the theory. In particular, I will here discuss two problems with later AT. The first is this: given that the meaning of each utterance merely provides an entry point to a topical field and thus gives access to an infinite number of topoi, how can it be that any conclusions are ever reached? For example, an utterance like (80) gives access to a multitude of topoi, including Tl : ‚the warmer the weather, the nicer the beach™, T2: ‚the warmer the weather, the less pleasant the work™, T3: ‚the warmer the weather, the shorter the skirts™, etc., and their opposites. (80) It™s hot. How do A & D explain that, on any given occasion, competent hearers are usu- ally able to figure out which conclusion(s) the speaker is intending him to draw (and, therefore, which topoi to use). Furthermore, how does the hearer know that it™s the weather the speaker is talking about and not the food the hearer has just placed in front of her? And how does the hearer know that with the word hot the speaker meant to describe the temperature and not the spiciness of the food? Clearly, these are the questions a pragmatic theory is traditionally expected to answer. However, A & D™s integrated pragmatics does not seem to address, much less answer them. What is needed here is clearly a non-integrated pragmatics, a notion for which A & D do not seem to make any provision. At this point an argumentation theorist might protest: this criticism isn™t fair, because A & D never set out to answer the questions above; AT is strictly a semantic theory. Let™s assume that this is so, even though A & D do not explicitly state it anywhere. In that case, one would expect AT to meet the basic requirements of a semantic theory, such as compositionality. However, if the meaning of predicates is given by bundles of topoi, it is not clear how the com- positionality requirement can be met. Furthermore, while AT does offer accounts of 694 C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665-699 the meaning of predicates like work and argumentative operators like but, it is not clear how the meaning of other linguistic elements, such as referential expressions, quantifiers, tense, etc., would be characterised in AT. However, these are small wor- ries compared with the second problem I want to discuss here. In a nutshell, a theory which ends up saying that language cannot be used to describe the world, be it the actual or some other possible world, and doesn™t have a good explanation of why it is that people nevertheless not only believe that language is used to convey information but are also prepared to act on information they have been given by purely linguistic means, simply cannot be adequate. After all, people act on purely linguistically conveyed information all the time. For example, I go to the station for 11 o™clock because my friend has told me that her train arrives at eleven, and she is quite likely to have gone to the station at a certain time at her end because someone told her there™d be a train then. More generally, and more impor- tantly, there are many things we only know today because someone wrote them down or told them to someone else. If our impression that we are conveying infor- mation using language is just an illusion, it must be an illusion so strong and wide- spread that every single human in the world not only believes in it but also regularly acts on it. As mentioned above, the step from recognising the existence of non-truth- conditional meaning to abandoning the notion that language is used to represent the world is not supported with enough evidence. What is more, even if the meaning communicated by most words is subjective, this does not mean that the notion of truth conditions has to be abandoned altogether. These two problems with later AT show that the theory is let down by its failure to make a principled distinction between semantics and pragmatics and by its res- olutely anti-cognitive stance. I™d now like to look at how a cognitive theory with a clear semantics/pragmatics distinction can solve problems concerning linguistic sub- jectivity without discarding the notion of truth conditions or the idea that people use language to convey information about the world, while at the same time acknowl- edging that this is not all language is used for. 6.2. Relevance Theory, linguistic subjectivity and truth conditions The cognitive approach to semantics and pragmatics taken by Sperber and Wilson (1986)‚s Relevance Theory (RT), reconciles the notion of truth conditions and the idea of subjective aspects of meaning, even if truth conditions are applied to mental representations rather than linguistic expressions. The first ingredient needed for such an account is a clear, cognitive, semantics/pragmatics distinction. On the RT view, utterance interpretation involves two distinct cognitive processes: decoding and inference. On encountering an utterance, a hearer first decodes the meaning of the words and their syntactic relations, which leads to an incomplete conceptual (i.e. mental) representation. He then uses his inferential abil- ities guided by the communicative principle of relevance (see Sperber and Wilson, 1995: 266-278) to recover a fully propositional representation, i.e. the proposition expressed, along with a range of purely implicitly communicated assumptions. On this view, anything that is encoded by the linguistic expression of an utterance falls C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 695 into the realm of semantics. This includes the kind of meaning dealt with by A & D™s integrated ‚pragmatics™. In RT, pragmatics is concerned with any aspect of infer- entially recovered meaning. This includes inferentially recovered elements of the proposition expressed.31 It is an important part of the RT view that the linguistically encoded meaning of all utterances radically underdetermines what the speaker actually intends to com- municate.32 This is where there is room for subjectivity in linguistic meaning. There are two ways in which Relevance Theory could account for an example like (69).33 (69) The film was interesting. On any relevance theoretic account, (69) would be seen as encoding an incomplete conceptual representation. That is, as it stands, the representation encoded by (69) is merely a template for a fully propositional (mental) representation. In other words, what is encoded by the words in (69) is a radical underspecification of the proposi- tion expressed (which, on the RT view, is a conceptual representation) - for exam- ple, the referent of the film and the temporal reference of the past tense have to be supplied pragmatically. However, when it comes to the question what exactly the word interesting encodes, there are two possibilities. The first possibility is to say that interesting encodes a concept which will have to be narrowed down and/or expanded, according to the context. This would mean that the concept that appears in the mental representation (thought) of a speaker uttering (69) (and in that of a hearer who has understood the utterance)34 is not the same as the concept encoded by the word interesting; they are rather what Carston (1996, 1998) calls ‚ad hoc™ concepts, pragmatically constructed by the hearer in the process of interpretation. The second possibility is that interesting does not encode a full concept at all, but rather what Sperber and Wilson (1998: 184-185) have termed a ‚pro-concept™. This would mean that the semantic contribution of interesting in any utterance must be contextually specified. The difference between the two possible accounts is that, on the first one, interesting does have a literal (conceptual) meaning, which will get enriched or loosened depending on the context. On the second account, on the other hand, interesting does not have a literal, determinate meaning: rather, as in the case of pronouns, its meaning on any given occasion has to be contextually determined. 3™ For a discussion of the RT semantics/pragmatics distinction in relation to other consttuals of the dis- tinction see Carston (1998: 38-50) and Carston (1999). 32 For an in-depth discussion of the role of underdeterminacy in RT see Carston (1998, ch. 2). 33 In fact, RT would account along similar lines for the meaning of red and square in (66) and (67), in which A & D (1983: 169) detected no traces of subjectivity. (66) The table is square. (67) The tablecloth is red. 34 NB. There is no claim that the concept entertained by the hearer has to be identical to that enter- tained by the speaker for communication to be successful. In fact, Sperber and Wilson (1998: 197-198) note that a duplication of meanings is not necessary for successful communication. Often, all that is required is a sufficient degree of similarity. 696 C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 For the purposes of this paper, it seems unimportant which one of these possibilities is chosen. The point is that, on either account, once the hearer has narrowed down or filled in the concept encoded by interesting, there will be an aspect of a state of affairs that is represented by the ad hoc concept or contextually determined value of the pro-concept. In other words, it will be possible to specify the truth conditions of the mental representation entertained by the hearer after he has processed an utter- ance of (69), it™s just that the concept INTERESTING*, where the asterisk indicates that the concept in question is ad hoc or a completed pro-concept, featuring in the hearer™s mental representation is not (exactly) what™s encoded by the word interest- ing. In this way, Relevance Theory provides a framework for handling subjective aspects of meaning without having to make the unacceptable claim that language cannot be used to convey information about the world. At this point, something should be said about the role of truth conditions in Rele- vance Theory. Even though what has been said so far in this section might make one think that RT is a truth-conditional theory of linguistic semantics, this is actually not the case. The central claim of a traditional truth-conditional semantics is that lin- guistic meaning can be captured in terms of truth conditions. This entails the view that words directly correspond with (aspects of) states of affairs in the world. This is not the relevance-theoretic view: virtually no sentence in a natural language encodes a determinate truth condition. In RT, most words are seen as corresponding with mental representations of (aspects of) states of affairs, not with the states of affairs themselves. These mental representations are what is meant by ‚concept™ in RT; words which correspond to such representations encode concepts. However, not all words are seen as encoding concepts; some words encode computational informa- tion concerning the manipulation of concepts rather than concepts themselves. These words are referred to as encoding procedural information. In RT, the notion of truth conditions comes in at the level of mental representa- tions. These (or, at least, many of them), represent states of affairs and can, there- fore, be given truth conditions. Thus, words encoding concepts, i.e. mental represen- tations, could be said to have indirectly truth-conditional meaning.35 Words encoding procedural meaning, on the other hand, cannot be said to have truth-conditional meaning even in an indirect sense. What they do is constrain or direct the hearer™s pragmatic inferencing. 36 Many of the expressions AT deals with (and which were instrumental in leading A & D to abandon a truth-conditional semantics), like for instance but and even, would be seen, within a relevance theoretic framework, as encoding procedural rather than conceptual information. Finally, I would like to say something about those aspects of utterance interpreta- tion that argumentation theorists have captured in terms of topoi and the conclusions 35 In fact, Deirdre Wilson (personal communication) reminded me that in Sperber and Wilson (1986, 1995) and Wilson and Sperber (1993), the term ‚truth-conditional™ is used as a shorthand for my ‚indi- rectly truth-conditional™. For further discussion of the role of a truth-conditional semantics in RT see Carston (1999). 36 For a more detailed account of the conceptual/procedural distinction see e.g. Blakemore (1987, 1997), Wilson and Sperber (1993), Rouchota (1998) and Iten (1998). C. [ten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 697 they license. RT would absolutely agree that utterances like (44) are not usually made just to inform the hearer of the time and that, indeed, speakers are likely to want to convey something additional, e.g. any of (79a-d). (44) It™s eight o™clock. (79) a. Hurry up! b. Take your time ! c. Turn on the radio ! d. Go brush your teeth! However, where AT explains this phenomenon with the help of scalar topoi, which are part of the meaning of (44), licensing the conclusions in (79), RT has a different, cognitive, explanation. On the RT view, the concepts encoded by the utter- ance in (44) give the hearer access to contextual assumptions, e.g. those in (81), which, combined with the information encoded by (44), will yield something like the ‚conclusions™ in (79). (81) If it™s eight o™clock, the speaker will want me to hurry. If it™s eight o™clock, I can take my time. At eight o™clock there™s a good science programme on the radio. If it™s eight o™clock, I should brush my teeth.37 Obviously, the assumptions in (81) are quite similar to the topoi which are likely to license the move from (44) to the conclusions in (79). However, while AT™s topoi are necessarily scalar and are seen as part of the (semantic) meaning of (44), RT™s contextual assumptions are typically non-scalar and derived purely pragmatically.38 While AT doesn™t seem to have an explanation for why hearers reach particular con- clusions (rather than any other conclusions, for which there would also be licensing topoi) on particular occasions, RT does have an explanation for why a hearer will access a given contextual assumption on a given occasion. In a nutshell, the pre- sumption of optimal relevance that every utterance communicates licenses the hearer to form interpretive hypotheses in order of accessibility (which includes the access- ing of contextual assumptions) and to stop processing when the interpretation meets his expectation of relevance (i.e. a particular yield of cognitive effects for the pro- cessing effort expended). For a full account of how the hearer chooses contextual assumptions and arrives at the intended interpretation see Sperber and Wilson (1986: 163-171; 1995: 266-278). 37 In reality, of course, there will be more than just one contextual assumption involved in the deriva- tion of each conclusion in (79). For instance, the hearer might well arrive at ‚If it™s eight o:clock, I should brush my teeth™ via the following assumptions: ‚I should be in bed by 8.15™, ‚I should brush my teeth before I go to bed™, ‚If I brush my teeth any later than 8 o™clock, I won™t be in bed by 8.15™. etc. 3R As a matter of fact, it would be interesting to investigate whether A & D are right in assuming that contextual information is essentially scalar in nature. This point was suggested to me by Deirdre Wilson (personal communication). 698 C. Iten I Lingua 110 (2000) 665499 7. Conclusion As mentioned above, AT draws attention to a number of interesting and important points about language, notably the existence of non-truth-conditional linguistic meaning and the fact that many expressions don™t have any completely objective meaning. However, the conclusions A & D draw from these observations are not jus- tified, especially Ducrot (1993)‚s extreme conclusion that language cannot be used to say anything true or false about the world. 1 believe that a cognitive theory, which has a clear semantics/pragmatics distinc- tion, allows for subjective aspects of meaning, and incorporates notions of represen- tational and computational linguistic meaning, is a more adequate framework within which to account for the phenomena observed by Anscombre and Ducrot. A refor- mulation of some of the promising accounts of specific linguistic expressions given by argumentation theorists in such a cognitive theoretic framework, such as Rele- vance Theory, would seem highly desirable. References Anscombre, J.-C. and 0. Ducrot, 1976. L™argumentation dans la langue. Langages 42, 5-27. Anscombre, J.-C. and 0. Ducrot, 1977. Deux mais en fran$ais? Lingua 43, 23-40. Anscombre, J.-C. and 0. Ducrot, 1983. L™argumentation dam la langue. Brussels: Mardaga. Anscombre, J.-C. and 0. Ducrot, 1986. Argumentativite et informativid. In: M. Meyer (ed.), De la metaphysique a la rhetorique. Brussels: Mardaga. Anscombre, J.-C. and 0. Ducrot, 1989. Argumentativity and informativity. In: M. Meyer (ed.), From metaphysics to rhetoric, 71-87. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. English translation of Anscombre and Ducrot (1986). Atlas, J., 1984. Comparative adjectives and adverbials of degree: An introduction to radically radical pragmatics. Linguistics and Philosophy 7, 347-377. Austin, J. L., 1962. How to do things with words. Oxford: Clarendon. Blakemore, D., 1987. Semantic constraints on relevance. Oxford: Blackwell. Blakemore, D., 1989. Denial and contrast: A Relevance Theoretic account of but. Linguistics and Phi- losophy 12, 15-37. Blakemore, D., 1997. On non-truth conditional meaning. Linguistische Berichte. Sonderheft 8, 82-102. Carston, R., 1996. Enrichment and loosening: Complementary processes in deriving the proposition expressed? UCL Working Papers in Linguistics 8, 205-232. Carston, R., 1998. Pragmatics and the explicit-implicit distinction. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Lon- don. Carston, R., 1999. The semantics/pragmatics distinction: A view from Relevance Theory. In: K. Turner (ed.), The semantics-pragmatics interface from different points of view. Oxford: Elsevier. Ducrot, O., 1984. Le dire et le dit. Paris: Minuit. Ducrot, O., 1993. Pour une description non-v&native du langage. Actes du congres de linguistique de Seoul, 8698. Geach, P.T., 1972. Logic matters. Oxford: Blackwell. Hare, R.M., 1952. The language of morals. Oxford: Clarendon. Iten, C., 1998. The meaning of although: A Relevance Theoretic account. UCL Working Papers in Lin- guistics 10, 81-108. Iten, C., in preparation. Non-truth-conditional meaning, concessives and concessivity. Ph.D. dissertation, University of London. Lyons, J., 1977. Semantics, Vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. C. Iten I Lingua II0 (2000) 665-699 699 Moeschler, J. and A. Reboul, 1994. Dictionnaire encyclopedique de pragmatique. Paris: Seuil. Nyan, T., 1998. Metalinguistic operators with reference to French. Bern: Lang. Rouchota, V., 1998. Procedural meaning and parenthetical discourse markers. In: A. Jucker, Y. Ziv (eds.), Discourse markers, 97-126. Amsterdam: Benjamin. Searle, J.R., 1969. Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy of language. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni- versity Press. Searle, J.R., 1979. Expression and meaning: studies in the theory of speech acts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Sperber, D. and D. Wilson, 1978. Les ironies comme mentions. Poetique 36, 399412. Sperber, D. and D. Wilson, 1986. Relevance: Communication and cognition. Oxford: Blackwell. Sperber, D. and D. Wilson, 1995. Postface. In: D. Sperber, D. Wilson, Relevance: Communication and cognition, 2ﬂd edition, 255-279. Oxford: Blackwell. Sperber, D. and D. Wilson, 1998. The mapping between the mental and the public lexicon. In: P. Car- ruthers, J. Boucher (eds.), Language and thought: Interdisciplinary themes, 184-200. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Wilson, D. and D. Sperber, 1993. Linguistic form and relevance. Lingua 90, l-25. Zagar, I. Z., 1999. Argumentation in the language system: Between particles and polyphony. Talk deliv- ered at PRAGMA 99 in Tel Aviv. Ms. Educational Research Institute, Slovenia. 