ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 709-715 Book review I. Rota and W. Johnson, A course in phonology. Oxford: Blackwell, 1999. Reviewed by Jolanta Szpyra-Kozlowska, Institute of English, Maria Curie- Sklodowska University, PI. M.C. SkIodowskiej 4, 20-03 I Lublin, Poland. www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Rota and Johnson™s A course in phonology is a very impressive 700-page volume meant to be a comprehensive introduction to the theory and practice of generative phonology. Although several such textbooks have appeared on the market within the last years, it should be stated at the outset that the book under review exhibits numer- ous innovative features and surpasses many of its current rivals in its pedagogical value. In fact, it can be considered an outstanding didactic achievement likely to replace other publications in the area of introductory phonology. As in size and scope A course in phonology resembles another well-known and widely used textbook, namely Michael Kenstowicz™s Phonology in generative gram- mar (1994), it is tempting to compare the two briefly (for a review of Kenstowicz™s book see Szpyra, 1995). Thus, both books have a similar structure; they first intro- duce the student of linguistics to the basic notions of phonetics and then proceed to present the major tenets, mechanism and results of mainstream generative research with focus on the developments in the 1980s and the 1990s. Both are addressed to beginner-students, but contain sections for more advanced learners. Finally, the aim of both textbooks is not only to present and explain phonological theory, but also to prepare the student for his own analytic activity through the inclusion of a large vari- ety of exercises and problems to solve. Despite these obvious similarities, the two books are emphatically not repetitions of each other. The major difference lies in the authors™ attitudes. Thus, Rota and Johnson have made an attempt, and largely succeeded, ﬁto sit inside the mind of the average learnerﬂ (‚Preface™, p. xiv) and write as user-friendly a book as possible. This is reflected in the focus on the analysis of primarily English data, easily acces- sible to the readers, and only then its extensions to other languages. Kenstowicz™s book employs a lot of phonological facts taken from many different languages, which makes it more difficult to study. Furthermore, while the latter author in his presentation follows rather closely the development of generative theory and numer- * E-mail: jszpyra@klio.umcslublin.pl 037%2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00009-7 710 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 709-715 ous controversies that abound in it, Rota and Johnson purposefully avoid involve- ment in such disputes since it is their belief that they might result in the learner™s confusion and hinder rather than facilitate the learning process. My own teaching experience shows that this is indeed the case and that the discussion of theoretical intricacies should better be postponed until the full mastery of the basics is achieved. The overall result of these differences is that A course in phonofogy is a more readily accessible book and, therefore, more suited to the needs of the beginners. On the other hand, Phonology in generative grammar can be recommended to more advanced students who have reached a sufficient degree of linguistic sophistication to be able to follow more complex aspects of the theory. Thus, ‚learner-friendliness™ constitutes the main principle which underlies the structure and contents of A course in phonology. This is seen in the clear and read- able style adopted by the authors and, first and foremost, the inclusion of numerous pedagogical devices aimed at helping the reader to move in the phonological maze without getting lost. Each chapter of the book begins with a list of points that are later discussed in it. The text is interspersed with grey boxes in which the authors ask the readers some questions or set a problem for them to solve in order to check whether a given passage has been properly understood. There are notes placed in the margins that summarize the main points made in the text which the learner is sup- posed to remember. Each chapter is concluded with a summary of its contents, fol- lowed by a set of questions to answer and exercises to do. The exercises allow the student to broaden the linguistic data to analyse as they concern phonological prob- lems taken from various languages. In the final pages, apart from such obvious ele- ments as the bibliography, the indices of languages, names and subjects, one finds a very useful glossary of the most important terms employed throughout the book. In brief, the authors have made a successful, in my view, attempt to interact with the user of the book in all possible ways. A course in phonology contains twenty chapters which fall into three parts. They might be cursorily described as introductory, intermediate and advanced. Part I is an introduction to articulatory phonetics and the most important elements of phonological analysis, and provides the student of phonology with the necessary theoretical background. To use the authors™ words, ﬁit supplies the basic tools of the phonological tradeﬂ (‚Preface™, p. xvi). At this point it is worth considering what these ‚basic tools™ are as a large variety of phonological frameworks and their numerous versions which have emerged within the last three decades are characterized by often conflicting assumptions and methods of analysis. This means that no agreement has been reached as to what is basic and therefore worth teaching to the beginners and what is just a transient invention likely to be forgotten within a very short period of time. In Rota and Johnson™s view, the beginner-student of phonology should, first of all, acquire sufficent knowledge of articulatory phonetics, which is clearly beyond dispute. No section of the book is devoted to acoustic phonetics (found, for example, in Kenstowicz™s Phonology) which many linguists regard as essential to phonology students. In this respect I tend to agree with Rota and Johnson; acoustic phonetics Book review I Linguu II0 (2000) 709-715 711 is, by all means, an interesting field of study of benefit to any linguist, but it is cer- tainly not crucial for beginning phonologists. The next ‚tools of the trade™ involve elements of structural analysis such as the phoneme, the allophone and the minimal pairs, though, strangely enough, no men- tion is made of equally well-established and useful notions of contrastive and com- plementary distribution. Then a presentation of classical generative concepts fol- lows. These include distinctive features and natural classes, underlying and surface representations, phonological rules to derive all allomorphs from single basic forms and phonological derivations. A surprising omission of the issue of rule ordering (whose discussion is postponed to Part III) must be noted here, however. According to the authors of A cause in phonology, the beginner-phonologists should also be acquainted with various autosegmental and feature-geometric mechanisms such as multi-tiered phonological representations (with the timing and melodic tiers), autosegmental feature delinking and spreading, monovalent and binary features, markedness, underspecification and floating autosegments. No discussion of the syl- lable, by many linguists viewed as one of the central notions in modem phonology, is found here since it is assigned to Part II. As this brief summary of the phonological concepts introduced in Part I demon- strates, Rota and Johnson™s choice of ‚the basic tools™ is fairly controversial and there is no doubt that other phonology teachers would choose somewhat different options. I would, for instance, include here a brief presentation of the syllable, but omit the issues of underspecification and some autosegmental details. I also find it difficult to agree with the authors™ (‚Preface™, p. xvi) claim that ﬁPart I is appropriate for a short introductory phonology courseﬂ. In my view the amount of information contained in these chapters is considerable and surpasses the possibilities of such a course. What also deserves a brief consideration is a somewhat unusual structure of Part I. Instead of a typical presentation of the phonetic foundations of phonology, a jux- taposition of these two areas of research and then a gradual introduction of phono- logical concepts, the authors have decided to intermingle sections on phonetics (the odd-numbered chapters 1, 3, 5 and 7) with those on phonology (the even-numbered chapters 2, 4, 6 and 8). Thus, a chapter on the articulation of obstruents is followed by an introduction to the basic concepts of traditional generative phonology. Next the phonetic properties of sonorants are presented to be succeeded by a chapter on distinctive features. Then the phonetic description of vowels within the Cardinal Vowel Scale can be found followed by an examination of their phonological proper- ties. I find this arrangement of the material dubious from the pedagogical point of view. It is my experience that students who master articulatory phonetics first find it much easier to proceed to phonological analysis. Studying both these aspects of lan- guage simultaneously might be too heavy a burden for the novice likely to result in his confusion and learning problems. I definitely opt for the traditional progression from phonetics to phonology. Part II is devoted to suprasegmental issues, i.e. the syllable (two chapters), stress (three chapters), tone and intonation (one chapter). Chapter 9 introduces the major concepts of syllabic phonology, such as syllable structure, the sonority hierarchy, sonority distance, etc. Then, in Chapter 10, a more 112 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 709-715 detailed survey of English syllables follows coupled with a discussion of further the- oretical notions, e.g. the OCP and onset maximization. My objections concern here section 8, in which the authors argue rather unconvincingly against complex codas in English (i.e. the claim concerns the limitation of the English coda to one consonant) and dismiss apparent counterexamples cursorily. They also maintain that in English word-final consonants do not syllabify into the coda, but directly to the syllable node without presenting, however, any strong arguments in favour of this hypothesis. It is not clear either what sonority scale is finally adopted as several versions of it are presented here. At this point a more general comment seems in order. While the authors of the book under review claim to (p. 630) ﬁhave opted for the cautious strategy of pre- senting the body of phonology in as neutral, non-doctrinaire a manner as possibleﬂ, it seems doubtful whether this aim has been achieved and can at all be achieved. In view of the existence of not only conflicting theories, but also competing accounts of the same body of facts, any choice of a solution to a phonological problem is bound to be non-neutral and subjective. The issue of the syllable is a case in point. Some models of phonology (for instance, Government Phonology) deny the validity of the syllable as a constituent. Furthermore, while onsets and rhymes are generally recog- nized, codas are often not. No agreement has been reached as to more specific issues, either. Thus, for example, many views on the English syllable can be found in the literature and Rota and Johnson™s version must be seen just as one of the pos- sible options, no more neutral and unbiased than other proposals. While this obser- vation is fairly obvious to any practitioner in the field, it does not follow from read- ing A course in phonology, in which a single interpretation of language data is usually provided. It thus remains the teacher™s task to make the students aware of the fact that alternative and perhaps more adequate accounts are often possible and even desirable. Neutral, non-doctrinaire descriptions of languages do not exist. The next three chapters constitute an excellent introduction to the issue of stress in English and to metrical phonology in general. It is here that Rota™s own scholarly interests are reflected in a very lucid presentation of truly complex issues and his own analyses of many aspects of English stress. First the most important mecha- nisms of metrical phonology are explicated, such as the metrical grid, the metrical foot, extrametricality, etc. Then the metrical principles and parameters are employed in the analysis of rhythm and stress in English (word stress, compound stress, phrasal stress). Finally, prosodic devices are demonstrated to play a crucial role in the description of segmental processes of Vowel Reduction and Flapping. The final chapter of this part deals with intonation and, very briefly, with tones. The focus is on intonation, in agreement with the authors™ preoccupation with pri- marily English data. Thus, the reader interested in tonal phonology is advised to con- sult other sources. Part III, entitled ‚Advanced theory™, contains further elaboration of phonological theory and centres mainly on the issues of the morphology-phonology interaction (Lexical Phonology), the syntax-phonology interaction (Prosodic Phonology), phonological rules, their cyclicity/noncyclicity and ordering, the organization of dis- tinctive features and Optimality Theory. Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 709-715 713 In Chapter 15 the authors begin with the notion of the cyclic application of phono- logical rules and demonstrate how it can resolve the problem of stress clashes in English and tone association in Tiv. Next, they contrast English cyclic main word stress with noncyclic secondary word stress. This is followed by a very interesting interpretation of different kinds of vowel shortening phenomena in English (exem- plified by the divine - divinity and deep - depth types of words) in terms of Strict Cyclicity, extraprosodicity and the requirement of foot bimoraicity. It should be noted, however, that while the proposed analysis of Trisyllabic Short- ening handles adequately its failure to operate in monomorphemic items such as nightingale, ivory and Oberon, it fails in the case of many morphologically complex words such as hyphen+ate, danger+ous, hibern+ate, vapor+ous, isol+ate, motor+ize, moment+ary, odor+ous, ovul+ar, etc. which are regarded by Rota and Johnson as unmotivated exceptions. As argued by Szpyra (1989) this approach can- not be viewed as adequate since the problematic forms are not exceptional, but sys- tematic in that they share a common property, namely the presence of a suffix boundary not in the syllable which directly follows the vowel subject to shortening as in divin+ity, extrem+ity, deriv+ative, etc., but two syllables away from it, as shown above. Apparently what matters for Trisyllabic Shortening is not only the presence of a morphological boundary, but also its location, which fact should be reflected in an adequate analysis. Chapter 16 undertakes an important issue of the relationship between phonology and other components of language, i.e. morphology and syntax, and the problem of defining the domains of application of phonological rules. It is thus an introduction to the basic tenets of Lexical Phonology and Prosodic Phonology. First the authors discuss well-known facts of English concerning the existence of two classes of affixes (cyclic and noncyclic), the need of interleaving morphology with phonology in one component (only one version of a lexical account of English of several that have been proposed is provided here) and the famous bracketing para- doxes. The latter are resolved by isolating phonological words which are not always isomorphic with morphological words. It is not clear, however, why the noun-forming suffix -al (as in arrive - arrival) is treated here as a cyclic affix; its sensitivity to the final placement of stress in the input verbs, coupled with its stress-neutral character and the impossibility of any fur- ther Class I affixation point rather clearly at its noncyclic nature - a conclusion reached by several other researchers. The Chapter also deals with the necessity to isolate phonological domains of rule application such as the phonological phrase, the intonational phrase, the utterance and the phonological word, all posited by Prosodic Phonology. Chapter 17 develops a theory of distinctive features which involves such aspects as underspecification (Radical vs. Restricted), markedness, binarity vs. monovalency and their organization into a hierarchical structure of Feature Geometry. My objections here concern the choice of the S-Voicing rule in English (operat- ing in such pairs as gymnastics - gymnasium, Caucasus - Caucasian, fantasy -fan- tasia) as a case for underspecification. In Rota and Johnson™s interpretation the medial fricative in, for example, raisin, season and Jesus is unspecified for voicing 714 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 709-715 which is subsequently supplied by the strictly cyclic S-Voicing rule, whereas the voicelessness of the alveolar spirant in basin, mason and isolate is specified in the lexicon and prevents the segments in question from undergoing voicing. This neces- sity of lexical marking means, in fact, that morpheme internally the occurrence of [s] and [z] is largely unpredictable and, therefore, should be a part of lexical representa- tion. Employing underspecification in order to handle such an apparently idiosyn- cratic phenomenon is thus unconvincing, particularly in view of the fact that these are voiceless obstruents which are generally considered unmarked and the voiced ones as marked. Chapter 18 is devoted to the interaction of phonological rules. It discusses differ- ent types of ordering relations between them (feeding, bleeding, counterfeeding and counterbleeding, as well as intrinsic and extrinsic ordering) on the basis of selected segmental processes of English such as S-Voicing, Velar Softening, Palatalization, Spirantization and vowel length alternations. The placement of this chapter in the book is somewhat questionable. First of all, its occurrence in Part III implies that rule interaction is not part of the ‚basic tools™ of traditional generative analysis, which is obviously not true. Secondly, squeezing a discussion of the issue which dominated phonological research in the 70s between underspecification and Feature Geometry of the 80s and Optimality Theory of the 90s also raises some doubts as to the logic of this arrangement. It is also a pity that, having introduced the models of Feature Geometry in the preceding chapter, the authors do not attempt to express segmental processes of English such as palataliza- tion in feature-geometric terms, particularly when the latter can reflect their charac- ter more adequately. Chapter 19 introduces the major assumptions and concepts of Optimality Theory, such as the notion of constraints on possible phonological structures, violability of constraints and their ranking. It illustrates the working of this model with some examples from English phonology (English syllable structure, Word Stress, Ash- Tensing) and shows how the optimality framework can be extended to morphology and, more specifically, to the analysis of the distribution of the plural and possessive allomorphs. In my view some parts of this chapter are too concise. It could do, for instance, with a more detailed explanation of the presented constraints. Moreover, the opti- mality model is illustrated with a few rather straightforward examples and it is not clear how it can handle more complex cases which involve, for example, several phonological phenomena. Finally, it is not sufficiently clear how Optimality Theory relates to the other frameworks discussed earlier in the book. The final chapter is a very useful and indispensable ending to the whole volume. It contains a brief summary of the preceding chapters and refers the reader to pri- mary sources whose mention has been avoided throughout the book. It also points to some controversial issues which have not been discussed in the preceding chapters and whose knowledge is necessary to any professional phonologist. As this sketchy summary of the contents of the book demonstrates, A cowse in phonology contains a wealth of information on the major aspects of generative research and its application to the description of English phonology and phonologi- Book review I Lingua II0 (2000) 709-715 715 cal systems of other languages. Its authors have made every effort to make the mate- rial accessible to the reader and present it in a clear and illuminating fashion. It,is possible, of course, to argue with Rota and Johnson about the structure of the book and various theoretical and analytic choices they have made, but on the whole the end result is that of a surprisingly coherent account of generative phonology. It leaves the reader with a very optimistic conviction that the research carried out within the last thirty years has considerably advanced our knowledge and under- standing of human phonological systems. In conclusion, Rota and Johnson™s A course in phonology is an excellent intro- duction to the theory and practice of mainstream generative phonology and should be on the reading list of any course on this topic. It has been written by people who are not only exceptionally good at doing linguistics, but also at teaching it. Given the wide choice of publications in this area, I have no hesitation at all in recommending A course in phonology to students and teachers of this subject. References Kenstowicz, M., 1994. Phonology in generative grammar. Oxford: Blackwell. Szpyra, J., 1989. The phonology-morphology interface: Cycles, levels and words. London: Routledge. Szpyra, J., 1995. Review of M. Kenstowicz, Phonology in generative grammar. Lingua 96, 189-195. 