ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001)247-277 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua The concept of 'universal' and the Case of Japanese * Denis Bouchard* Universitd du Qudbec Montrdal, D~partement de Sciences du Langage, Universitd Paris 8, 2 Rue de la Libertd, 93526 Saint-Denis Cedex, France Abstract The dominating proposal in generative grammar is that fixed positions in a phrasal struc- ture universally encode information relating to semantic combination: Merge is assumed to be the unique, universal means of combination. Apparent departures from this structural encoding, such as languages which code relations by marking arguments with case, or poly- synthetic languages that mark predicates with special affLxes, are assumed to be superficial: at some deeper level, all semantic combinations in all languages are encoded by fixed posi- tions in a phrasal structure. This is based on the assumption that having a unique form of coding is maximally effi- cient. Structural properties derive from the temporal ordering of elements in the sensorimo- tot apparatus (Kayne, 1994). But this is just one of four modes of giving a form to a seman- tic combination in the sensorirnotor apparatus. Therefore, even if we assume that one of these modes of coding is more basic, we must posit a type of general computational process which can access all modes of coding, in order to recode all of the 'secondary' modes into the basic mode. So there is no simplification nor increase in efficiency, in the end, since at some level of processing, all modes must be accessible in any event. In fact, a reductionist model may induce a less efficient processing, since it requires the additional recoding of all 'secondary' codings. The reductionist approach results in unexplanatory kinds of parameters in the account of language variation. On the other hand, the traditional view (Meillet, 1949, 1950; Keenan, 1978, among many others) that correlates free order of arguments and case marking can be explained on highly principled grounds: the parametric choice between rigid order and case marking follows from inherent properties of the human sensory and motor apparatus which are motivated on grounds independent from language, properties which are logically anterior to linguistic theory. I illustrate the differences between reductionist and nonreductionist approaches by comparing two reductionist analyses of several phenomena I have benefitted greatly from the comments of members of the audience to which I presented this material in Utrecht. I thank Mamoru Saito for answering some queries about the data, and three anony- mous reviewers for their helpful comments. This work was supported by a grant from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. * E-maih bouchard.denis@uqam.ca 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: S0024-3841 (00)00036-X 248 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 tied to Case in Japanese - Boskovic and Takahashi (1998) and Saito and Fukui (1998) - with a nonreductionist analysis based on fundamental aspects of the A-P system. © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Merge; Universal coding; Variation; Case; Japanese 1. Introduction The main goal of linguistic theory is to define the notion of possible human lan- guage, to uncover the necessary properties that a system must have to be a human language. Following a long tradition going back at least to Aristotle, linguistic mod- els take language to be a relation between form and meaning. Thus, Chomsky (1995) assumes that UG has only three basic components: the two levels of representation PF and LF which interact with two 'external' systems - the articulatory-perceptual system (A-P) and the conceptual-intentional system (C-I) -, and a computational system for human language CHL that relates PF and LF. One aspect of the relation between form and meaning that has received much attention in the generative framework is how the semantic relations that hold between predicates and arguments (as well as similar 'thematic' relations) are coded in a form. The dominating proposal is that fixed positions in a phrasal structure encode this kind of information universally. Apparent departures from this structural encoding, such as languages which code relations by marking arguments with case, or polysynthetic languages that mark predicates with special affixes, are assumed to be superficial: at some deeper level, all relations between predicates and arguments in all languages are encoded by fixed positions in a phrasal structure. The traditional view (influenced by studies of Latin) that functional markers of case encode this kind of information is revived in Neeleman and Weerman (1999), but it is marginal in mainstream generative grammar. The choice between an analysis based on fixed positions and one based on functional markers is presented as an absolute choice: the chosen mode of coding must be a universal property of all languages, and the other one is recoded into terms of this mode by some process in the CHL. Thus, in the former, morphological case marking is reduced to a spell-out of abstract case, a property of fixed positions in phrasal structures, whereas in the latter, fixed positions arise in languages that have empty heads in the Kase phrase, hence have a distribu- tion limited by the ECP. I will suggest that this reductionist view of universality should be reassessed on the basis of theoretical and empirical considerations: the correct approach to differ- ent types of languages is not that they all reduce to one of the subtypes. This kind of reduction is based on an inadequate notion of 'universal' and results in unexplana- tory kinds of parameters in the account of language variation. Instead, I argue that the traditional view (Meillet, 1949, 1950; Keenan, 1978, among many others) that correlates free order of arguments and case marking is correct. I show that this cor- relation, which has been argued for on an intuitive basis by many authors, goes much beyond intuition, and can be explained on highly principled grounds: the parametric choice between rigid order and case marking follows from inherent properties of the D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 249 human sensory and motor apparatus which are motivated on grounds independent from language, properties which are logically anterior to linguistic theory. In section 2, I present the broad outlines of what an optimal theory of UG should look like. It will then be clear that reduction to one submode of coding, such as fixed positions as a universal, is not at all optimal. In section 3, I illustrate the differences between reductionist and nonreductionist approaches by comparing two reductionist analyses of phenomena tied to Case in Japanese - Boskovic and Takahashi (1998) and Saito and Fukui (1998) - with a nonreductionist analysis based on fundamental aspects of the A-P system. 2. Foundational notions of linguistic theory As in any scientific theory, the axioms of UG should optimally include only nec- essary elements, i.e., self-evidently true axioms. Virtual conceptual necessity requires that the three components CHL, A-P and C-I be present. Thus, one may imagine, in some mental game, that a language has no physical realizations (if humans could communicate by telepathy for example), but one cannot imagine a language with no contentful elements and no means to interpret them: so C-I is con- ceptually necessary. Moreover, in the absence of telepathy, information must be con- veyed between humans via their sensory and motor apparatus: hence a 'form' com- ponent interfacing with A-P is a virtual necessity (otherwise language is unusable among speakers). Given these two components of a different nature, a third compo- nent is required - a system to mediate between them. Each of these three components is severely constrained. The A-P and C-I compo- nents are subject to 'external' constrainsts because they interface with systems out- side of the realm of language; the CHL being a means to relate these two compo- nents, it is in turn constrained by the nature of the objects it must relate. Thus, form is constrained by the physical properties of our Articulatory-Perceptual system, and meaning is restricted to notions that may link up to our Conceptual-intentional sys- tem. These are defining and essential properties of language: only objects with these properties are assumed to fall within the domain of linguistic inquiry. The sciences to which observational propositions of the A-P system and the C-I system could be subjected are assumed to be logically anterior to linguistic theory (such as acoustics, the biophysics of articulation, the cognitive aspects of how humans conceptualize the world, and so on). For instance, words must be ordered in oral languages because our articulatory system does not allow the production of two words simultaneously. The explanation for this fact lies more in human biology than in linguistic theory. In this vein, when Kayne (1994) proposes to derive most aspects of syntactic hierarchi- cal structure from properties of sequencing of sounds, he assumes that the articula- tory apparatus of human beings which produces the sounds of language has physical properties which are logically anterior to the syntactic properties he is studying. The assumption is so obvious that it is left totally implicit. All that Kayne says is that "[a]t least in the PF wing of the grammar, the terminal symbols must be linearly ordered" (1994: 1-2). 250 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 The strong external constraints on the A-P and C-I components have for effect that the CHL mediating between them has highly specified properties determined by properties of the interfaces: the nature of the objects being related determines the kind of relation that may be established between them. Since the properties of the CHL are in great part determined by the A-P and C-I components, a proper under- standing of the functioning of the CHL therefore requires that we have some fairly precise idea of the nature of the representations at the interfaces. If inadequate rep- resentations of meaning or form are adopted, it is very unlikely that linguists will come up with a proper model of the CHL mediating between semantics and form, since one of the elements in the relation will not have the appropriate properties. This linking problem is well known. For instance, I argue in Bouchard (1995) that this is what happens in approaches to semantics that rely on notions that are too concrete, such as thematic roles. The- matic notions are much too concrete, they rely too much on our intuition about a par- ticular, typical use of a lexical item. Words are characteristically indeterminate and can be used in a very large (if not infinite) number of situations. A thematic approach tries to encode some of the background knowledge of speakers in lan- guage. But this is uneconomical, and so complicated that language would be unus- able if it was designed in that way. I show that only a much deeper level of abstrac- tion of meanings allows a highly constrained linking between semantics and syntax. Similar considerations hold for the A-P component: we must also have a fairly close approximation of the nature of that system in order to discover the properties of the mediating system CHL. For instance, in a typical task of Grammar, there are two 'meanings' A and B, and a relation that holds between them. This must be given a perceptual form if an exchange is to take place between speakers. It is a common- place observation that there are four ways to give a form to semantic relations in an oral language. (1) Ways to give a form to semantic relations in an oral language. i. Juxtaposition: A and B are ordered temporally next to one another, deriv- ing the structural relation of sister. ii. Surimposition: B is a modulation superimposed on A, such as intonations to express affirmation, question, exclamation in English, or lexical mean- ings and grammatical functions in tone languages. iii. Marking of A: the dependent gets a marking, such as Case marking for an argument. iv. Marking of B: the functor gets a marking, such as predicate marking in polysynthetic languages. This kind of multiple choice is perceived as requiring a less efficient system, under the implicit assumption that UG is maximally efficient if CHL accesses only one mode of coding information, since no options at all would be available in the way the interpretive component interacts with syntax: it would have only one type of coding information to interpret. A single type of computation would need to be con- sidered by a learner, thus potentially contributing to the primary goal of explanatory D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 251 adequacy. For instance, Kayne (1994) argues that the temporal ordering of elements in the sensorimotor apparatus at the A-P interface determines phrase-structural prop- erties of the CHL, deriving the essentiels of X-bar theory. Moreover, he seems to assume that the CHL is uniquely determined in this way for all languages. This strictly structurally-based model of CHL is closely tied to a subtype of the modes of coding information in the sensorimotor apparatus: a special status is given to the lin- ear (temporal) ordering of sets of sounds (words or constituents) in the auditory-oral channel (see Kayne, 1994 and Chomsky, 1995: 335-340). 2 On the face of it, this is a good result. However, the instructions of UG are prop- erties of human beings, using a perceptual system that has several forms of coding mechanisms. It is a fact that languages make use of the different available modes of coding in (1). Therefore, even if we assume that one of these modes of coding is more basic, we must posit a type of general computational process which can access all modes of coding, in order to recode all of the 'secondary' modes into the basic mode. So there is no simplification nor increase in efficiency, in the end, since at some level of processing, all modes must be accessible in any event. In fact, a reduc- tionist model may induce a less efficient processing, since it requires the additional recoding of all 'secondary' codings. The model must make the inefficient assump- tion that this general computational process may not simply apply freely anywhere. It may relate one particular mode, designated as universal on an a priori basis, directly with the interpretive component; it may also relate any of the other modes to the 'universal' mode; but oddly, the general computational process must be specifically precluded from relating any of these other modes directly with the C-I interface, even though it must be compatible with all of them. This kind of reductionist approach, just like the traditional approaches, offers no explanation for the fact that these choices exist. Though the different types of coding observed appear to be intuitively well-rooted, as witnessed by the fact that these types are recurrent in the history of the study of language, why these particular modes of coding information are the ones found seems to be ad hoc. Under the view that I am adopting, the options can be identified on principled grounds. The fact that 2 To have the CHL determined only by temporal ordering is understandable as an early hypothesis about language, given that linguistic elements end up ordered in time with respect to others in actual speech. However, one must not confuse the functional aspect of order - the notion of temporal Juxtaposition - and the articulatory aspect to order: some order is required in oral languages since we cannot produce more than one sound at a time, and there is a low limit on simultaneous signs in sign languages due to the restricted number of articulators. These are two distinct properties: two elements could be semanti- cally combined, and yet their ordering relation could be unrelated to the semantic combination, it could be functionally irrelevant, and conversely, two elements could hold an ordering relation but not be semantically related. This is because the functional use of order is not a necessary property of language: there are other means allowed by the A-P interface which a language could use to convey information about the combination of constituents. Therefore, it should not be assumed a priori that the functional use of order is a universal property of language, nor that all languages have a basic order, and even less that there is a single universal order for all languages, as in Kayne (1994). A similar reasoning applies to the assumption that functional markings are the unique mode to code grammatical relations, as in Neeleman and Weerman (1999): it also singles out one of the options allowed by the A-P system and gives it the status of a universal. 252 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 languages vary in the use of Juxtaposition, Superimposition or Marking follows from inherent properties of the human sensory and motor apparatus. The reason why there is variation is simple. In addition to conditions specific to each interface, there is a condition imposed on the system as a whole: the interfaces must be linked in order for meanings to be passed on between speakers through their A-P apparatus. Varia- tion arises from the fact that the physical properties of the A-P apparatus are such that there is more than one way to optimally satisfy this linking requirement. The reason why variation is limited to exactly the four choices in (1) is that these are the only four possibilities allowed by inherent physiological properties of the human sensory and motor apparatus (Bouchard, 1996). Having associated each of A and B with a form, there are four ways to physically indicate that a relation is being established between the two elements A and B, and language uses all four. We may first, by Juxtaposition, position one element with respect to the other so that they share an edge: such a Juxtaposition results in temporally ordering the sets of sounds A and B (morphemes, words or constituents), as in languages like English and French that make a functional use of order extensively. 3 Second, by Surimposition, A and B may share a temporal area, as when A is a set of temporally ordered sounds and B is a modulation superimposed on A to express affirmation, question, excla- mation in English, or lexical meanings and grammatical functions in tone languages. Third, by Marking of A, one may modify the form of the element A to indicate that A establishes a relation with B. Thus, suppose that in our example, B expresses a predicate meaning and A expresses an argument meaning. Then the form of the argument A may be modified, by a Case marking for example, to indicate which grammatical relation holds between A and B. Fourth, the Marking of B is the coun- terpart of Marking of A: here it is the form of the predicative element which is mod- ified to indicate that it holds a certain relation with an argument, as in polysynthetic languages. 4 If we look at (1) as a list of disconnected modes of coding, this raises an apparent paradox. Conditions arising from the interfaces of form and of meaning must be sat- isfied in an optimal way, and it seems paradoxical that optimal satisfaction allows variation at all. However, if we fully take into account the constraints induced by the physiological properties of the A-P component, exactly this variation is expected. There is no discrepancy between the fact that meanings must be encoded in a form so that they can be passed on between speakers, and the fact that a semantic relation, such as a predicate-argument relation, may be encoded in any of four ways at the 3 The boundary is temporal in the case of oral languages because the auditory-oral channel is restricted to the single physical dimension of time. A complete picture of aspects of the human sensory-motor apparatus relevant for language should include properties of other channels than the auditory-oral chan- nel. In particular, the visual-gestural channel makes use of the dimensions of space in addition to time. This has important effects in sign languages which are explored in detail in Bouchard (1996), in partic- ular, Juxtaposition in space but not in time. 4 These last two ways of giving a form to semantic relations, Marking of A and Marking of B, are actu- ally instances of Juxtaposition or Superimposition at the word level rather than at the phrasal level. At the deepest level of description, therefore, there are only two core ways to encode meaning into a form: Juxtaposition and Superimposition. Thanks to Patrick Sauzet for pointing this out to me. D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 253 A-P interface: these are the four possibilities allowed by the logically anterior phys- iological properties of human beings, and each optimally satisfies the requirement to encode meanings in a form. Our physical make-up forces these particular parametric choices on the grammar, and it is on this property that broad typological classes are based. The parameter is set on general interface conditions that the human language faculty is expected to satisfy, and the properties involved are very salient physical features: very limited experience should suffice to set the values of the parametric settings. Since parameterization arises from the interaction of properties logically anterior to language, the absence from the model of one of the available means to physically encode relations would require a strong empirical motivation. But there is no gap: linguists have observed all and only the ways to physically encode a relation that fall under Juxtaposition, Superimposition or Marking of A or B. The data are logical consequences of very well grounded premisses about the nature of the A-P system. Therefore, the commonplace thesis that languages come in varying types, like rigid order languages or case marking languages, is not a vague intuition with little formal appeal: the types actually found are exhausted by the coding possibilities allowed by our physiological make-up. Hence, interface properties provide a deep explanation of the fact that these morphosyntactic relations, and only these, are the ones that covary. 5 This kind of parameterization directly accounts for the covariation that has often been reported in the distribution of processes which have the same 'function' (Keenan, 1978). Thus, covariation between morphological case and word-order restrictions on major constituents is expected since they have the same function of coding grammatical relations. Another commonplace observation is that languages are not monolithic. Lan- guages typically make use of Juxtaposition, Superimposition and Marking to various degrees: the degree to which word order is fixed varies considerably, as well as the manifestations of markings such as case or agreement, and the use of intonation. So a language may use more marking, or more order, than another, but no language is absolutely of one particular type overall. This derives from natural perceptual bounds in the use of different modes of coding. First, there is a lower bound on redundancy: each type of information in a given language is generally encoded in a single mode (Juxtaposition, or Superimposition, or Marking), presumably to ensure an easier recognition of the congruence of the information type by associating it with a unique type of form. Conversely, there is also an upper bound on the perceptual complexity that can be tolerated, on how many semantic distinctions can be carded by one form of coding (Keenan 1978), and on which types of semantic information require to be coded by different forms in order to ensure an easier recognition of the differences between the information types when the differences are very narrow. 6 5 To my knowledge, it has never been noticed that morphosyntactic typology is determined by physio- logical properties. Matters are quite different in phonology, where an appeal to biological/articulatory factors is frequently made. For instance, distinctive features are based on such A-P factors. 6 Further studies will be needed to identify which kind of semantic properties require to be distin- guished in this way. The hypothesis that they should correspond to different modes of coding in a given 254 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 That is why languages do not use only one form of coding, but mixed systems. For instance, whereas morphological markings encode grammatical relations in Latin, the domain of the relation is coded structurally - the clause -, as well as the consti- tutive parts of the element involved - the NP. English uses mainly structural coding, but construal (like pronominalization) and agreement are coded morphologically, not structurally, as is clear from the fact that they occur across sentences. 7,8 Since bare adjectives must appear prenominally in English, semantic distinctions coded by the order of an adjective and a noun in other languages like French are coded by intona- tion in English: a Mmple s~rvant (= un domestique simple), a simple s~rvant (= un simple domestique). Sign languages overwhelmingly use gestural coding, yet they do have recourse to structural-linear coding, most notably in borrowings from oral lan- guages: fingerspeUing and mouthing transpose linear written or oral signals into lin- ear signs. In evolutionary terms, there are advantages in having more than one form of coding information: if all information is coded in a single mode, there is the risk that a small accident to this single means of performing a task may be fatal to the whole coding process, if there are no other modes to fall back on (these are potential modes of coding, not simultaneous modes for the same information, as this would violate the lower bound on redundancy discussed above). The evolution of French offers a typical scenario of this kind. Old French was a pro drop language, presum- ably because its verbal morphology was 'rich enough' to recover the information that helped identify the subject, such as indications of person and number. When blind phonological processes 'accidentally' started to annihilate morphological markings in the verbal system of French, the language reverted to pronouns in fixed positions to express the information that would otherwise be lost. If there hadn't been this other means to fall back on, the language might have become inoperative. In models that adopt a CHL based on a single mode of physical expression, the CHL is narrowly tied to a particular mode of coding information in the sensorimotor apparatus. These approaches run counter to the principle of limiting a theory to necessary and sufficient notions, since there is nothing in the nature of the A-P inter- face that induces the necessity to have only structural positions or only functional markings as a prerequisite to the interpretation of semantic relations. Because of language can be readily verified if indeed different forms are consistently used across languages to code certain classes of semantic properties. 7 The triggers for construal or agreement may at times be coded structurally, such as the subject-verb relation; but these triggers must be distinguished from the actual processes of agreement or construal (Bouchard, 1995: 223-233). 8 Cross-sentential construal is an instance where the type of information to be transmitted precludes the use of certain physical modes of coding: Juxtaposition and Superimposition are not possible cross-sen- tentially. Another instance where a second form of coding is forced upon the language is when a verb selects two accusative objects in a Case-marking language. As we can see in the following example from German (due to Neeleman and Weerman, 1999), the order is not free anymore: since Case cannot guide the selectional interpretation, another mode of coding has to be selected. (i) a. dass der Lehrer die SchiJler diese Sprache lehrt that the teacher the pupils-ACC this-ACC language teaches b. *dass der Lehrer diese Sprache die Schiiler lehrt that the teacher this-ACC language the pupils-ACC teaches D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 255 their foundational premisses, these approaches run into problems with covariation between fixed positions, case markings and polysynthetic markings. For instance, the universal fixed positions hypothesis requires that special properties be attributed to the structure of languages with a rich Case marking on arguments or polysynthetic marking on predicates to account for the relatively free order that these languages exhibit. Thus, a role like 'external argument' is assumed to be universally encoded by a fixed position, such as Spec of V. Since it is assumed that the phrasal-structural codings are universal, the relatively free order of the subject in a language with a rich morphological Case system like Latin requires that special properties be attrib- uted to the structure of those languages. For instance, NPs (and maybe the verb) would optionally have to raise overtly. The various combinations of movement or non-movement of S, V and O would derive the different surface orders. In terms of checking theory, the reason for this optionality would be that the features in func- tional heads such as T, AGRS or AGRO that attract the S, V and O, would be optionally present (or optionally strong). Each optionality constitutes a separate empirical discovery. This convergence of optionalities of features would be the case whenever a language happens to have NPs that are overtly marked for Case. Why a correlation should hold between overt Case marking and optionality of features in functional heads would remain a mystery, however. Covariation in coding grammatical functions is not deduced from invariant prin- ciples in this kind of theory. Instead, repeated stipulations, one for each case, are added to the theory and accidentally conspire to give exactly the effects that are deduced from the theory with optimal parameterization presented above. Unless it is shown that there are empirical facts that require these additions (not just that are compatible with them or made so by more additional mechanisms) and that the sim- pler analysis cannot account for them, then this theory should be rejected in favor of the more parsimonious one. The stipulations increase if we take into account other physical aspects of the A-P, such as Superimposition or, as shown in Bouchard (1996), a different modality such as the gestural-visual, which uses the additional dimensions of space. This contrasts sharply with the nonreductionist approach, in which covariation is not an accident, but a principled property of language. To high- light the contrast, I will now compare how phenomena tied to Case in Japanese are analysed in these two approaches. 3. Case in Japanese Japanese exhibits a host of properties related to the encoding of predicate-argu- ment relations which, in my view, indicate that it is primarely an argument-marking language: predicate-argument relations are encoded mainly by case marking the arguments, not by assigning them fixed positions or by marking the predicate. I rely here on the work of Saito (1985), Boskovic and Takahashi (1998) and Saito and Fukui (1998) for facts and try to present them in as neutral terms as possible. I will argue that all these properties can be directly correlated to the hypothesis that Japan- ese is an argument-marking language. On the other hand, approaches that postulate 256 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 a single universal coding of predicate-argument relations run into problems and require repeated unexplanatory stipulations, that do not arise from conceptual neces- sity. I will illustrate this by comparing my account of these properties with the accounts of two recent proposals based on fixed positions, that of Boskovic and Takahashi (1998) (henceforth B&T) and of Saito and Fukui (1998) (henceforth S&F). 3.1. NPs have overt case marking NPs are morphologically marked for case in Japanese. This codes the type of grammatical relation that they establish with a predicate. As in Latin, the domain of the nominal expression, i.e., the identification of its constitutive parts, is coded struc- turally (Juxtaposition) (the nature of one relation is coded by Genitive case, but its domain, as well as the domain of all other N-related relations such as adjectival modification, appears to be structurally coded). However, Japanese differs from Latin in its treatment of the domain of the relation that an NP establishes with a predicate. In Latin, this domain is the clause and this is also coded structurally, with relatively free order of NPs in that domain. In Japanese however, there does not appear to be a coding of this domain, hence the relatively free order of NPs even out- side of the immediate domain of the predicate ('long distance scrambling'). The overt case marking of NPs is a defining property of this class of languages in my approach. The relation that an NP establishes with a predicate is coded by mark- ing the NP with case because that is the coding adopted by the language among the possibilities allowed by the inherent physiological properties of the human sensory and motor apparatus. The domain of the nominal expression is coded by a different mode, as expected given an upper bound on the perceptual complexity that can be tolerated; so Japanese has a structural NP. As for the domain of the relation estab- lished by the NP, it appears to be very loosely coded, if at all. The reason for this is that, in most instances, what predicate an NP relates with is inferable from the case properties of the NP in combination with the selectional properties of the predicate. When this is not the case, subtle parsing strategies are used to determine which link- ing is the correct one, as we will see in section 3.3. Case marking is a very basic property of Japanese under this view. In what follows, I will present several proper- ties of Japanese, and I will argue that they all derive from this basic choice in the mode of coding. This contrasts radically with the analyses of B&T nor S&F. Neither B&T nor S&F actually discuss the fact that Japanese is a case marking language. It appears to be a property that is totally unrelated to the rest of the phenomena in their analyses, an accidental quirk as far as those data are concerned. 3.2. Free order of NPs The order of NPs is relatively free ('scrambling'), among the NPs of a single clause (2); this also holds among the NPs which are dependents of main and embed- ded verbs: one or more NP related to the embedded verb can appear before the NPs D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 257 of the main verb (3). Verbs appear in final position with respect to arguments and adjuncts, and they are stacked in an order of decreasing embedding, the first one being the most embedded, the last one being the matrix verb; an embedded verb is generally marked with an embedding marker, such as to in (3a-b). (2) a. Mary-ga John-ni sono hon-o watasita. Mary-NOM John-DAT that book-ACC handed 'Mary handed that book to John' b. John-ni sono hon-o Mary-ga watasita. (3) a. Bill-ga Mary-ga John-ni sono hon-o watasita to itta. BiI1-NOM Mary-NOM John-DAT that book-ACC handed COMP thinks 'Bill thinks that Mary handed that book to John' b. Sono hon-o John-ni Bill-ga Mary-ga watasita to itta. 'That book, to John, Bill thinks that Mary handed' I return to the embedding of verbs in section 3.9. For now, let us concentrate on the relatively free order of NPs. In the interface-based approach that I am advocat- ing, Japanese and English differ with respect to the way they satisfy the necessity to encode predicate-argument relations in the sensorimotor apparatus: Japanese does it by marking the arguments, English does it by juxtaposing the arguments with (a pro- jection of) the predicate. This is a typical case of covariation of processes with the same function. The fact that a rigid order of the NPs is not required in Japanese fol- lows directly from this fundamental parametric choice: the relation that an NP holds with a predicate is not encoded by juxtaposing it to the predicate (or a projection of it), but by marking the argument morphologically. For instance, in (2) and (3), we know that John-ni is the indirect object of watasita, regardless of its position in the sentence: this is inferable from the dative case of the NP and the fact that only wat- asita is compatible with that case, In an analysis based on fixed positions to encode predicate-argument relations, the flexibility in the order of NPs exhibited by Japanese is the opposite of what is pre- dicted at first hand. So the analysis must distinguish between some positions that count for predicate-argument relations and some that don't, and explain how NPs may freely appear in these other positions in Japanese, but not in English. S&F account for this difference between the two languages by the interaction of four con- jectures. First, there is an operation Move in grammar (or some similar operation like Attract). Second, they posit that the two languages crucially differ in the way nominative case is dealt with: in English, nominative case is licensed via speci- fier-head agreement, but not in Japanese. 9 Third, they assume that specifier-head 9 S&F give as evidence for this property the fact that Japanese may have multiple ga-phrases in the same clause: assuming that specifier-head agreement is one-to-one, then multiple ga-phrases cannot be licensed by this mechanism. Note however that agreement in general is not obligatorily one-to-one. For instance, a pronoun may agree with several NPs, with appropriate adjustments for features of number and gender, as m the following French example: (i) Jean, a dit ~ Mariej qu'ilSl÷ J devralent partir tft. 'John told Mary that they(MASC-PLUR) should leave early.' 258 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 agreement closes off the projection. Fourth, free recursion is allowed at the X" level. As a result of these four conjectures, in English, movement of the subject to [Spec, IP] is adjunction to I' followed by specifier-head agreement, which results in projec- tion of I' to I", with no further recursion. In Japanese, after adjoining the subject to I', this node is still available for further adjunction since there is no specifier-head agreement closing off the projection; hence, other NPs may be adjoined to I', giving the scrambling effect. In the Minimalist Program, movement is a Last Resort opera- tion, which takes place only if it is motivated by feature checking. If scrambling is analysed as optional movement, this is apparently in conflict with Last Resort. S&F argue that scrambling is nevertheless optional movement because it is not triggered by feature-checking: since it derives a configuration that is X-bar compatible, a head final projection that can be generated by Merge, it need not have a driving force. But this view of Merge is incorrect. Merge combines a head and a nonhead to form a unit, and projects the head. Merge may escape Last Resort defined on feature check- ing, but it is not free and has its own kind of Last Resort condition: an element may form a unit with another element only if it selects it in some way (in an extended sense of selection covering both them-like relations with a head and modification which licenses the merging of an adjunct with some constituent); otherwise, Merge grossly overgenerates. Therefore, S&F's account of scrambling based on X-bar com- patibility fails, since it does not take into account the licensing condition of selection on Merge: Merge is no freer than Move. B&T's account based on fixed positions does not fare any better. They also note the problem that the optionality of scrambling poses for a theory that incorporates a Last Resort condition on movement: scrambling does not seem to be needed to sat- isfy feature-checking, since an alternative derivation without movement is available. Even agreement with the verb appears not to be always one-to-one. Aissen (1989) says that the comi- tative marker in Hungarian, Yapese and Turkish is distinct from the general marker of conjunction. Yet the verb agrees with the combined features of the subject and the comitative. 0i) a. Elindultunk a vezettmmel. (Hungarian) we-left the my-guide-with. 'I left with my guide.' (also: 'We left with my guide.') b. Ka ra bow Tamag. (Yapese) PAST they come-DUAL Tamag 'He came with Tamag.' c. Libatotikotik xchi?ukli Xune. (Tzotzil) we-went with DEF Xun. 'I went with Xun.' (also: 'We went with Xun.') d. Hasan-la gittik. (Turkish) Hasan-with we-went, "I went with Hasan.' (also: 'We went with Hasan.') A structural analysis by means of specifier-head agreement has no direct way to account for this kind of agreement. See Bouchard (1995), section 3.3.2.2, for a unified account of all types of agreement, includ- ing cross-sentential agreement, based on coherence of interpretation of indices rather than a structural relation such as specifier-head. Finally, as Boskovic and Takahashi (1998) indicate in their note 12, one must be careful in correlat- ing multiple subject constructions and scrambling: Slavic languages and German allow scrambling, but not multiple subject constructions. D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 259 They argue that the problem dissolves if scrambling is viewed as a lowering opera- tion rather than a raising operation. Consider the case of the direct object sono hon- o in (3). In (3a), B&T assume that sono hon-o appears in its V-complement position, by Merge. When scrambled as in (3b), "sono hon-o is directly introduced into the matrix IP-adjoined position by Merge, and remains there in the PF side of the deriva- tion" (1998: 351). In order to satisfy theta requirements, the NP is lowered to the embedded VP-complement position. This movement is consistent with Last Resort since B&T assume that theta-roles are formal features that drive movement. Under a global view, the scrambling derivation in (3b) is less economical than the derivation in (3a). However, B&T argue that two derivations should not be compared globally, but locally: "at a particular point X the decision about whether a particular operation will apply should be made only on the basis of information available at X. No look- ahead is allowed. As a result, a derivation can be ruled out via the notion of econ- omy only if at a particular point in the derivation an alternative operation is available that is less costly at that point [the two derivations in examples such as (3)] are equally economical, since inserting sono hon-o in the matrix IP-adjoined position is no less economical than inserting it in the lowest V-complement position" (1998: 352). B&T's claim that adjunction of NP to IP is just as economical as insertion in the complement position is true only in a system where thematic relations are evaluated at LF. But theta evaluation at LF is global by its very nature, so B&T's remark is intemaUy contradictory, in a sense. In a 'fully local' system where we build up numerations and evaluate derivations cyclically (Chomsky, 1999), thematic relations are presumably evaluated while the structure is being built up. In that case, B&T have a problem when the object is scrambled out of the embedded clause: given their analysis, the object is not in the numeration for the embedded clause, so that the theta-feature of the embedded verb will not be checked at the relevant cycle, and the derivation should crash.l° Conversely, if we take literally their notion that a derivation is ruled out if "an alternative operation is available that is less costly at that point", inserting sono hon- o in the lowest V-complement position may be deemed less economical than adjoin- ing it to the matrix IP: at the stage where only the embeded V watasita has been introduced in the derivation, it is less costly NOT to apply the operation 'Merge sono hon-o' than to have it apply. Even if some notion of local evaluation can be made to derive the result that the two derivations in (3) are truly equal in cost at some point and hence free variants, the question of language variation remains: why is scrambling disallowed in Eng- lish? In B&T's analysis, two conditions must be satisfied for scrambling to occur: it must be possible to base-generate an argument in an IP-adjoined position, and an ~0 I thank two reviewers for pointing out the importance of this contradiction in B&T's analysis. Note additionally that the hypothesis that theta-roles are formal features is in contradiction with most current assumptions. Studies of thematic properties, such as the influential works of Jackendoff (1987, 1990), assume that thematic roles are not primitives of the theory, but are better viewed as (structurally-defined) relations among elements. Under that assumption, it is difficult to have them as features, 260 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 argument must be attracted to a theta position at LF. Japanese should meet both con- ditions, but not English. B&T leave open which of the two conditions English fails. It could be that IP-adjoined positions cannot be base-generated in English, as sug- gested by Saito (1989). Alternatively, English may require its theta-positions to be filled in overt syntax: in terms of Chomsky (1995), theta features would be strong in English, but weak in Japanese. However, in their discussion of clause-internal scrambling, B&T unknowingly provide an argument against an analysis of scrambling based on satisfaction of theta requirements. They allow a scrambled phrase to remain in its surface position at LF, in order to account for the wide scope of the Q-NP in examples like (4) (see the dis- cussion in section 3.6 below). (4) Daremo-ni dareka-ga atta. Everyone-DAT someone-NOM met 'Someone met everyone' (either Q-NP has wide scope) They hypothesize that "when moved to I, a verb may 0-mark its object in the IP- adjoined position, allowing it to stay there at LF" (1998: 360). Numerous languages are assumed to have V-to-I movement in the framework that B&T adopt, which should allow an object scrambled clause-internally to satisfy theta requirements; yet many of these languages are not scrambling languages. We are therefore left with only their first option - the unexplanatory stipulation that non-scrambling languages disallow base-generated IP-adjoined positions, which is little more than a restate- ment of the problem.~l In sum, the analyses of S&F and of B&T are very similar. For B&T, scrambling in Japanese derives from the stipulation that recursion of adjunction to IP is allowed in the base in this language, whereas for S&F, scrambling is possible because this recursion is allowed as a result of movement (they also allow it in the base to account for multiple subjects). Neither S&F nor B&T provide a meaningful account of the fundamental property of scrambling nor of its correlation with case marking. In both analyses, the cooccurrence of case marking and of scrambling (i.e., of recur- sion of adjunction) is accidental. In contrast, I am claiming that the traditional view (Meillet, 1949, 1950; Keenan, 1978) correlating free order of arguments and case marking is correct (similar obser- vations could be made about the correlation between free order of NPs and predicate t l In any event, the option based on the idea that theta features are strong in English but weak in Japan- ese is also a restatement of the problem. In Chomsky (1995), this kind of appeal to features is an attempt to provide a link with interface properties. All observed linguistic variation would be reduced to choices of essentially morphological and phonological features in the lexicon. However, the operative features are not morphological and phonological features: the features that actually determine what must be checked in a derivation are second-order features such as [+strong], or noninherent categorial features. The only thing these features do is encode whether movement is overt or covert. They only have corrective effects: they adjust the order of phrases when grammar otherwise makes wrong predictions about ordering. These features have no link with necessary interface properties, and are obviously not necessary elements of computational systems. Therefore, the results obtained derive from no deep property of grammar. D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 261 marking in polysynthetic languages, but I must leave a detailed discussion of this topic for later research), and I provide principled reasons on which the correlation may be based. 12 3.3. Restrictions on scrambling of arguments of embedded verbs We saw in example (3b), repeated here as (5), that more than one NP-argument of an embedded verb may precede arguments of the matrix verb. (5) Sono hon-o John-ni Bill-ga Mary-ga watasita to itta. that book-ACC John-DAT BiI1-NOM Mary-NOM handed COMP thinks 'That book, to John, Bill thinks that Mary handed' However, arguments of an embedded verb may not just freely mix with argu- ments of the matrix verb. If an argument of the embedded verb appears between arguments of the matrix verb, as in (6b), then the result is much less felicitous (Saito and Fukui, 1998: 453): (6) a. John-ga Bill-ni Mary-ga sore-o motteiru to itta (koto). John-NOM Bill-DAT Mary-NOM it-ACC have COMP said 'John said to Bill that Mary has it' b. ??John-ga sore-o Bill-ni Mary-ga motteiru to itta (koto). In the case-marking analysis of scrambling, the number of arguments of the embedded verb that precede those of the matrix verb is expected to be free, as in (5), since order is not relevant for arguments. The difficulty speakers encounter with some orders, such as (6b), comes from constraints imposed on the processing when the type of relation the NPs holds with a predicate is indicated by case marking, and which predicate it holds it with is not coded structurally nor by marking, as in Japan- ese. A first possibility, suggested by a reviewer, is that Minimal Attachment (Frazier, 1987) engenders the following parsing of (6b). At the start, John-ga is attached to the main clause, under the assumption that no embeddings are assumed if not neces- sary. This assumption has for effect that sore-o is also attached to the matrix clause initially, since sore-o might perfectly well be an argument of the same predicate as t2 There is an aspect of S&F's analysis that makes it quite similar to the one I am arguing for. They do not give the precise mechanism for ga-licensiug. However, in their note 13, they suggest that it may be done by a rule of ga-insertion similar to of-msertion, or "that a phrase with ga is simply licensed, or even 'feature-checked', in a position sister to an I projection". The important point for S&F is that ga is not licensed via specifier-head agreement. This could be interpreted as meaning that nominative case is not assigned structurally in Japanese, hence the possibility of having multiple ga-phrases. If we extend this to all case marking in Japanese and dissociate it from properties of structure, as it should be for general reasons in my view, then the free order of NPs follows: order is tied to structure, but structure is not involved here. Moreover, the stipulative statements S&F make about movement, specifier-head agree- ment or recursion of I' are based on structural properties, so they too can be dispensed with since struc- ture is not involved. 262 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 John-ga. This is where lies the processing problem: when motteiru is encountered, which obligatorily selects a direct object, sore-o must be reanalysed as the direct object of this embedded verb. Such a reanalysis is costly, hence (6b) is a garden path. This solution does not quite work, however. First, it wrongly predicts that (5) should be as problematic as (6b), if not more, since two NPs are initially parsed as attached to the main clause and then must be reanalysed as being part of the embed- ded clause. Second, the parser is presented as building phrase structure of the famil- iar type, with structural embedding as a central property. This is not consequent with the case marking analysis I propose, in which the domain of the grammatical rela- tions expressed by case is not coded structurally. If we correct this discrepancy, the facts are accounted for straightforwardly. Japanese is a case-marking language that does not code the domain of grammati- cal relations structurally and which has its verbs stacked in final position in an order of decreasing dependency. In the string of case-marked NPs, the parser is looking for the subsets of NPs that are related to each verb. The only constraint is that such a 'GF-packet' (Grammatical Function packet) must not contain NPs with the same case specification. A GF-packet is not intially identified as relating to a main or a dependent V. For instance, consider the parsing of (6a). The first NP John-ga trig- gers the opening of a GF-packet. Next, Bill-ni is incorporated in this packet. This is due to economy: it is costly to open a new packet. This economy constraint is essen- tially a restatement of minimal attachment, given not in terms of structure, but in general terms of smallest processing domain, regardless of the basis on which this domain is determined (i.e., structural or otherwise). Mary-ga triggers the opening of a new packet. This is due to the fact that there is already a ga-NP in the initial packet; more generally, it seems that ga-NPs always trigger the opening of a new packet, which is not surprising due to the special status of the ga-case: it is the case at the top of the hierarchy, in the sense that it is the first one picked out of the case array, so that verbs with a single argument typically have a ga-NP dependent; more- over, ga-marking has the peculiar property of being recursive (the multiple subject construction), expressing then a loose aboutness relation with the rest of the sen- tence. Continuing with the parsing of (6a), sore-o is added to the current packet, the one which has been opened by Mary-ga. When motteiru is encountered, the current packet is attributed to it, thus forming a unit, a complete functional complex, and closing the GF-packet containing Mary-ga and sore-o. When itta is encountered, the active packet contains John-ga and Bill-ni, plus the CFC built on motteiru, which is marked as dependent by to; this active packet is attributed to itta. Consider now the parsing of (5). The first NP sono hon-o triggers the opening of a GF-packet. John-ni is incorporated in this packet for reasons of compatibility and of economy on the opening of new packets. Bill-ga, beating the special ga-marking, triggers the opening of a new packet. This closes the initial packet containing sono hon-o and John-ni; however, this initial packet is irregular since it does not contain a ga-NP, so it is tagged as such. Next, Mary-ga triggers the opening of a new packet. This active packet is attributed to watasita, which is encountered next; this first encounter of a verb triggers an attempt to regularize the irregular packet containing sono hon-o and John-ni; thus completing the set of arguments for watasita. When D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 263 itta is encountered, the active packet contains Bill-ga plus the CFC built on watasita, which is marked as dependent by to; this active packet is attributed to ittu. If we now turn to (6b), we see that it creates a parsing problem. John-ga triggers the opening of a packet, to which sore-o and Bill-ni are then added since they are compatible with John-ga. Mary-ga trigers the opening of a new packet. When mot- teiru is encountered, the active packet contains only Mary-ga, and there is no irreg- ular packet to add to it" the only way to get the correct parse is by undoing the first packet and reassigning sore-o to the packet with Mary-ga. This is a costly reanaly- sis, hence (6b) is a garden path. Note that this parsing strategy predicts that it should be difficult to scramble a ga- NP over another ga-NP, a phenomenon already observed by Saito (1985). (7) *Sono hon-ga John-ga yoku ureteiru to omotteiru that book-NOM John-NOM well sell COMP think '*That book, John thinks that sells well.' In (7), sono hon-ga triggers the opening of a packet. Next, John-ga also opens a new packet. When ureteiru is encountered, the active packet contains John-ga, this packet is attributed to ureteiru, and the desired reading cannot be obtained without considerably revising the parse.13 A second prediction of GF-packet parsing is that initial NPs that are not ga- marked and that precede another ga-marked NP (the 'irregular' packet in 5) do not get linked to the main verb but to the most embedded verb (if compatible). This is highly unexpected under a structural strategy based on Minimal Attachment, since it appears to be a preference for antilocality. ~z Consider now how analyses based on fixed positions, such as those in S&F and B&T, deal with these facts about scrambling. In these analyses, scrambled NPs undergo some form of movement. Multiple scrambled NPs as in (5) appear to vio- late Rizzi's (1990) Relativized Minimality condition (RM). Both analyses propose technical ways out of this problem. S&F argue that since scrambling is not motivated by feature checking and hence is not movement to an A-bar Spec, it is not subject to Relativized Minimality: in other words, scrambling is more like Merge than Move, so it is not technically submitted to RM if RM is a condition on Move. t3 Interestingly, in (6b), the interpretation with John-ga interpreted as the embedded subject, i.e., as a ga-NP scrambled over another ga-NP, though not perfect, is better than the one in which it is the matrix subject (Mamoru Salto, personal communication). In (6b), the regular parse gives us two packets as schematized in (i): (i) NOM ACC DAT # NOM When encountering the verb motteiru, it seems that its obligatory selection of a [NOM ACC] packet can induce the speaker to reassess the parsing as in (ii) in order to get a parse compatible with the verb. (ii) NOM ACC # DAT NOM It seems to be easier to simply move the delimitation of the packets than to reconstruct the packets as described above. r4 This does not mean that Minimal Attachment is wrong, only that it does not apply here because this is not a parsing working on phrase structure, given the nature of Japanese. Minimal Attachment is most likely correct for the parsing of phrase structure. 264 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 B&T take a similar tack. In theft analysis, the Move operation is one of lowering, not raising. If we take Rizzi's notion of intervention relevant for RM literally, then lowering is exempted from RM. According to Rizzi, W can induce an RM effect for movement from X to Y only if W c-commands X and does not c-command Y. For instance, in (3b), the target Y is the object position of watasita; since both sono hon- o and John-ni presumably c-command the target Y, neither of them induces an RM effect. While both S&F and B&T may satisfy the letter of RM, they go against the spirit of Rizzi's proposal. The idea is that if both positions W and Y are potential targets for an operation affecting X, W is considered to intervene and to prevent Y from being targeted if W is structurally closer to X. Rizzi's choice of the word minimality is fairly clear in this respect. Therefore, a more local potential candidate for X-bar compatible movement in S&F should count as intervening. Similarly, a more local potential candidate for a lowering operation in B&T should count as intervening. 15 As for the additional fact that embedded and matrix arguments cannot be easily intermingled by scrambling, as in (6b), B&T do not discuss it, and it is not clear how their analysis could handle it, especially since they exclude lowering from RM. 16 S&F assume that sore-o in (6b) is attached to a projection of the matrix verb. They assume that the Merge operation of scrambling in this case induces the projection of the target VP and that the final landing site is completely within the V projection: this qualifies it as an A-Position, hence the operation is clause-bound like operations involving A-Positions generally are. Why the target VP projects in this case is unclear to me. Moreover, I see no independent motivation to assume that the landing site qualifies as an A-Position, nor that this makes the operation necessarily clause- bound (raising is assumed to be A-movement and is not clause-bound). In any event, the account is premised on sore-o being attached to a verbal projection, not to an IP- projection. But it is unclear why the object could not have been scrambled to the matrix IP, and then the subject John-ga scrambled over that object. This appears to be licit in theft analysis. So the way they account for the marginality of (6b) is based on assumptions with weak independent motivation, and their analysis seems to allow an alternative derivation which would converge. 3.4. Scrambling of adverbials Adverbials from embedded clauses are not very free in theft positioning, i.e., they cannot appear sentence-initially. Thus, (8b) is ungrammatical under the interpretation f-~ A reviewer suggests that the elements are maybe sufficiently dissimilar here not to trigger an RM effect: for instance, an accusative NP would not induce such an effect on a dative NP since they don't have the same grammatical function or theta-features. It may be so, but then this practically empties RM of its predictive possibilities. 16 They could assume that the phenomenon is due to parsing and that grammar need not exclude such sentences. However, since B&T's analysis is crucially based on phrase structure properties, parsing would incorporate something like Minimal Attachment. We saw that this incorrectly predicts that (5) should be at least as problematic as (6b). D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 265 where the adverbial riyuu-mo naku 'without any reason' modifies the embedded predicate: (8) a. Mary-ga John-ga riyuu-mo naku sono setu-o Mary-NOM John-NOM reason-even without that theory-ACC sinziteiru to omotteiru. believes COMP thinks 'Mary thinks that John believes in that theory without any reason.' b. *Riyuu-mo naku Mary-ga John-ga sono setu-o sinziteiru to omotteiru. The restricted positioning of adverbials is accounted for directly in an analysis that has free order follow from choosing morphological marking to code relations rather than order. Since adverbials are not case marked to indicate what function they have in the sentence, another means is adopted by the language: the adverbial is juxtaposed to the arguments of a predicate, so that it becomes part of the packet linked to this predicate, which it modifies. There are constructions in which an adverbial can in fact be scrambled to a sen- tence-initial position. Interestingly, they all have a property that makes it possible to identify the relation established by the adverbial, thus indirectly supporting my analysis (examples from Boskovic, 2000): (9) Kyuuni-sika suddenly-NPI 'Mary said that John only suddely started crying.' (10) ?Naze Mary-ga [John-ga sono setu-o sinziteiru ka] why Mary-nora John-nom that theory-acc believes Q 'Mary knows why John believes in that theory.' (11) Yukkuri booru-o Mary-ga John-ga nageta to itta. slowly ball-acc Mary-nom John-nom threw that said 'Mary said that John slowly threw a ball.' Mary-ga [John-ga nakidasa-nak-atta to] itta. Mary-nom John-nom start.to.cry-neg-past that said sitteiru (koto) knows (fact) If the adverbial is marked as a negative polarity item by sika as in (9), it can be scrambled since the scope marker nak attached to the verb nakidasa indicates that the adverbial links with this predicate. Similarly, if the adverbial is a WH-phrase, as in (10), the question marker ka indicates what predicate the WH-adverbial links with, i.e., it indicates the scope of the WH-phrase. Finally, more direct evidence for the packet analysis comes from examples like (11), in which the adverbial is scram- bled in tandem with an object of the embedded verb: the packet formed by yukkuri booru-o contains an NP marked for case which makes it possible to determine what predicate the packet is related to. S&F attribute scrambling to the fact that I' is not closed off by specifier-head agreement in Japanese, so it is still available for further adjunction. This fails to account for the impossibility of scrambling adverbials since it says nothing about the category of the adjoined phrases. 266 D. Bouchard I Lingua Ill (2001) 247-277 B&T attribute the imposibility to scramble adverbials to the fact that there is no formal reason for the scrambled element to move down from its adjunction position to the matrix IP: "given that adjuncts are licensed by being adjoined to categories, the adjunct is already licensed where it is base-generated [...] the adjunct in [(8b)] possesses neither a Case-feature nor a 0-role that could motivate its LF movement" (1998: 355-356). But this is an oversimplification. Adjuncts are not licensed simply by being adjoined to categories: they must hold a semantic relation such as modifi- cation with the phrase that they combine with. B&T are making the same mistake with adjuncts as S&L did with the combination of heads and arguments: they omit to take into account the licensing condition of selection/modification on the struc- tural combination. Therefore, given that adjuncts are licensed by (something like) adjunction AND a relation of modification, there is a very good reason for the adjunct to move down into the embedded clause: just like an argument moves down to satisfy its semantic relation with a predicate in their analysis, an adjunct should move down to satisfy its semantic relation of modification. If the complete picture of adjunct licensing is taken into consideration, B&T have no explanation for the impossibility to scramble an adjunct. 3.5. WH-phrases 3.5.1 WH-NPs Free order holds for WH-NPs as well as regular NPs. Thus, in (12b), nani-o is an accusative WH-NP which is related to the embeded verb, yet it appears before John- ga, an argument of the main verb. (12) a. John-ga Mary-ga nani-o katta ka sitteiru. John-NOM Mary-NOM what-ACC bought Q knows John knows what Mary bought b. Nani-o John-ga Mary-ga katta ka sitteiru. The free order of WH-NPs is not different from that of other NPs: their case marking makes it possible to identify their grammatical function independently from structural properties. Their WH-feature requires that their scope be identified in addition to their grammatical function. This is done by a question marker on the appropriate verb. Thus, in (12), the question marker ka indicates that the scope of the WH-phrase nani-o is the functional complex of the embedded verb katta and the accusative marking of nani-o makes it compatible with an interpretation as an argu- ment of katta. In addition, the semantics of a verb like sitteiru 'knows' requires an immediately embedded V that is specified as interrogative. This specification is pro- vided to the verb katta directly by the question marker ka, possibly in combination with the WH-phrase of which ka marks the scope. The role of the question marker is not taken into account in the structural analy- ses of S&F and B&T. S&F stipulate that scrambled WH-NPs can undergo radical reconstruction at LF, i.e., can be moved back to the positions appropriate for their interpretation at LF under the 'plausible assumption' that operations not due to D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 267 feature checking are 'semantically vacuous': since they do not establish an operator- variable relation, they may be undone at LF. For B&T, the [+WH] specification of the embedded clause derives from their assumption that scrambled WH-NPs, like all scrambled NPs, must be lowered in LF to the positions where they receive theta roles. Note that this is not quite enough in (12b): the lowered WH-NP must not only go to its theta position, but it must also somehow provide the appropriate WH-features to the clausal com- plement. 3.5.2. WH-adjuncts Consider now WH-phrases that are adverbial adjuncts rather than NPs. WH- adjuncts are fairly freely ordered with respect to NP-arguments in single clauses (13), and we saw in (10) above that a WH-adverbial can be related to an embedded verb when the question marker ka indicates the scope of the WH-phrase. (13) a. John-ga naze sono hon-o katta no? John-NOM why that book-ACC buy Q 'Why did John buy that book?' b. Naze John-ga sono hon-o katta no? why John-NOM that book-ACC buy Q c. John-ga sono hon-o naze katta no? John-NOM that book-ACC why buy Q However, Saito (1994) has observed a peculiar restriction when there are WH- NPs in the sentence in addition to the WH-adjunct: the WH-adjunct cannot be the first one in the sequence of WH-phrases. This holds in both simple sentences (14) and in complex sentences with embedded clauses (15.). (14) (15) *John-ga naze nani-o katta no? John-NOM why what-ACC buy Q *Naze dare-ga Mary-ni John-ga sono hon-o katta why who-NOM Mary-DAT John-NOM that book-ACC buy to itta no? COMP said Q 'Who told Mary that John bought that book why?' (with why having matrix scope) If the WH-adjunct is preceded by a WH-NP, then the sentence is fine. As shown by the ungrammaticality of (17b), a non-WH NP preceding the WH-adjunct does not have a corrective effect: only a WH-NP as in (17a) has that effect. (16) a. Nani-o John-ga naze katta no? what-ACC John-NOM why buy Q b. Dare-ga naze nani-o katta no? who-NOM why what-ACC buy Q 268 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 (17) a. Dare-ni naze dare-ga John-ga sono hon-o katta who-DAT why who-NOM John-NOM that book-ACC buy to itta no? COMP said Q b. *Mary-ni naze dare-ga John-ga sono hon-o katta Mary-DAT why who-NOM John-NOM that book-ACC buy to itta no? COMP said Q Note that in each example in (16)-(17), all the WH-phrases are related to the same V. If, however, the WH-phrases are related to different verbs, the sentence is ungrammatical. Thus, in (18), nani-o is an argument of the embedded verb katta, whereas naze and dare-ga are related to the main verb ina; this uniformity constraint holds even for multiple WH-constructions involving only WH-NPs and no WH- adjuncts (19)J 7 (18) *Nani-o naze dare-ga Mary-ni John-ga katta to itta no? what-ACC why who-NOM Mary-DAT John-NOM buy COMP said Q (19) ?? Nani-o John-ga dare-ni Mary-ga tabeta to itta no? what-ACC John-NOM who-DAT Mary-NOM eat COMP said Q (lit.) 'What did John tell who that Mary ate?' Saito (1994) bases his analysis on the idea that a WH-adjunct in violation of the ECP can be saved by covertly adjoining to another WH-phrase in a higher position. The WH-cluster formed this way then moves to the Spec-CP position. This idea of WH-cluster is on the right track, but there are two problems with it. First, if the ECP is a crucial factor, technical questions arise. Why is the WH-adjunct in the Spec-CP t7 There are two apparent exceptions to this uniformity constraint. First, we would expect (la), with a single WH-NP, to be good, and (ib) with two non-uniform WH-NPs to be bad; yet the exact opposite holds. (i) a. ??John-ga Mary-ga nani-o katta kadooka oboeteiru ka osiete kudusai. John-NOM Mary-NOM what-ACC bought whether remember Q tell please 'Please tell me what John remembers whether Mary bought'. b. Dare-ga Mary-ga nani-o katta kadooka oboeteiru ka osiete kudusai. who-NOM Mary-NOM what-ACC bought whether remember Q tell please 'Please tell me who remembers whether Mary bought what.' However, note that there are two Q-markers here, kadooka and ka. In (ia), packet parsing associates nam-o with the embedded verb katta and the marker kadooka; ka is therefore missing a matching WH- phrase. As for (ib), it is natural to assume that the uniformity constraint holds only if there is a single Q- marker which licenses a single cluster of WH-phrases; therefore, there is no violation of uniformity here since each WH-phrase has its own Q-marker. The second apparent exception to the uniformity constraint involves infinitival clauses as m (ii); but there appear to be independent reasons to assume that infinitival verbs form a single complex predicate with the main predicate, so that the WH-phrases are all uniformly related to this complex predicate. (li) Nani-o naze dare-ga Michael-ni utauyoo(ni) itta no? what-ACC why who-NOM Michael-DAT sing tell Q 'Why did who tell Michael to sing what?' D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 269 position incapable of governing its trace when there is another WH-phrase as in (14) and (15), but capable of proper government in (13)? A related question is why the trace resulting from adjoining the WH-adjunct to another WH-phrase does not create an ECP effect. Also, if there can be covert adjunction, we could expect covert scram- bling (which is adjunction in his analysis), so that at LF, (14) and (15) could have the structures of (16a) and (17a), respectively. The second problem with the idea of WH-clusters is that it is quite unnatural in an approach that has grammatical functions coded structurally: the cluster has for effect that the structural properties are completely obliterated. On the other hand, this idea fits very well in my proposal. Cluster formation has four basic properties: (i) the first WH-phrase determines the type of the whole cluster (argument-like or adjunct-like); (ii) the cluster must be argument-like (consequently, the first WH-phrase must be argument-like); (iii) the cluster must be WH, witness the ungrammaticality of (17a) (consequently, the first phrase must be WH); (iv) the cluster functions as a unit and all its members are uniformly related to the same V. All these properties follow directly from parsing in packets. We saw that case marking induces parsing into GF- packets, It is natural to assume that WH marking also triggers parsing into parallel WH-packets. The four properties of cluster formation then follow. Property (i) derives from parsing itself. Property (ii) follows from the fact that GF marking is the way of coding elements with respect to predicates in Japanese. Property (iii) follows from the obvious condition that a WH-packet is only created if a WH-element is encountered. Property (iv) is a consequence of the formation of a packet, which are uniform by definition. 3.5.3. Islands It is a well known fact that islands are violated by scrambling in Japanese (Saito, 1985). In (20), sentence-initial sono hon-o is interpreted as the object of a verb inside a WH Island. In (21), Bill-o is interpreted as the object of a verb inside a Complex NP. In (22), sono hon-o is related to a verb in an adjunct phrase. 18 (20) Sono hon-o~ John-ga [Mary-ga t~ katta kadooka] that book-acc John-nom Mary-nom bought whether siritagatte iru (koto). want.to,know (fact) ? ?'That book, John wants to know whether Mary bought.' (21) (?)Bill-oi [John-ga [Mary-ga ti sakete iru to yuu ] uwasa]-o Bill-acc John-nom Mary-nom avoiding Comp say rumor-acc kiita] (koto) heard (fact) *'Bill, John heard a rumor (which says) that Mary is avoiding.' (22) (?)Sono hon-o, John-ga [Mary-ga t, katta yomioete kara] that book-acc John-nom Mary-nom finish.reading after ~8 The traces are used only as a device to help reading the examples and have no theoretical status here. 270 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 dekaketa (koto). went.out (fact) *'That book, John went out after Mary finished reading.' In an analysis of Japanese in which grammatical functions are coded by case marking, not by structural juxtaposition, and the domain of the relation that an NP establishes with a predicate is also not coded structurally, the absence of island effects is expected. These effects derive from the determination of structural domains, and no such domains are established in Japanese for GF identification. 3.6. Quantified noun phrases Free order also holds for Q-NPs. If there is only a single clause involved as in (23), either Q-NP may take scope over the other, whereas a Q-NP from an embed- ded clause never takes scope over a matrix clause Q-NP, regardless of scrambling: daremo-ni has narrow scope with respect to dareka-ga in both (24a) and (24b). (23) a. Dareka-ga daremo-ni atta. Someone-NOM everyone-DAT met 'Someone met everyone.' (either Q-NP has wide scope) b. Daremo-ni dareka-ga atta. (24) a. Dareka-ga Mary-ga daremo-ni atta to omotteiru. Someone-NOM Mary-NOM everyone-DAT met COMP thinks 'Someone thinks that Mary met everyone.' b. Daremo-ni dareka-ga Mary-ga atta to omotteiru. The free order of Q-NPs is due to their case marking. If there is no structure that is relevant for the positioning of arguments in Japanese, then a notion like c-com- mand is not defined and it cannot have a role in properties of scope. In line with Bar- wise and Perry (1980), Cooper (1983), Homstein (1984), we may assume that Q- scope is not dependent on structural notions such as c-command, but rather is universally determined by processes of storage and value-loading. In my terms, this is even more likely, since in two types of languages, those with argument marking and those with predicate marking, order, and hence structure, plays a very secondary role. t9 Schematically, coarguments as in (23) could be attributed a value in either order: they are part of the same GF-packet, so they are not distinguished at this level. Thus, if dareka-ga gets a value first, it is 'specific', it has wide scope; if daremo- ni is value-loaded first, then it has wide scope. 2° If Q-NPs are not co-arguments ~9 In this respect, recall Partee's (1996) criticism of May (1977): after his rule of LF raising has applied, c-command does not actually disambiguate Q-scope in all cases. So he "abandons the otherwise respected principle that the input to semantic structure must be a disambiguated syntax" (Partee, 1996: 21). 20 Actually, when one of the NPs is ga-marked as in (23), there is a clear preference for this NP to have wide scope. This, I assume, follows from the fact that ga-marking is associated with 'old material', i.e., as previously value-loaded. D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 271 however, as in (24), they belong to different GF-packets, and these packets are asso- ciated with different predicates. These predicates are in an embedding relation, and this has an effect on scope. The first relation between a GF-packet and a predicate to be resolved by the parser is the one of the embedded predicate, and Q-NPs are assigned scope simultaneously to this resolution (to avoid backtracking), The rela- tion between the main predicate and its GF-packet is the last to be resolved, so its Q- NPs are assigned widest scope. S&F do not discuss scope facts of scrambled Q-NPs. I already alluded to B&T's analysis above. They assume that when a verb is moved to I, it may 0-mark its object in the IP-adjoined position, allowing it to stay there at LF: this is how daremo-ni gets wide scope in (23b), There is another derivation for (23b) in their analysis: daremo-ni can be lowered to the V-complement position, in which case it takes nar- row scope. These two derivations of (23b) should be of equal cost: I leave it to B&T to show us that this is the case, Moreover, the proposal that a verb raised to I can theta-mark an NP adjoined to IP, while technically feasible, is not intuitively very appealing. As for the obligatory narrow scope of daremo-ni in long distance scrambling as in (24b), it would derive from its obligatory lowering in this case, since it cannot be properly theta-licensed otherwise: the embedded verb cannot raise to matrix I. Note however that there is a technical problem here. If movement is triggered by feature- checking, and if features alone are attracted at LF, the theta feature of daremo-ni must lower. However, there is no clear reason why Q-features must be pied-piped, why they should be 'free riders' in Chomsky's terminology. "A category a contain- ing F moves along with F only as required for convergence" (Chomsky, 1995: 270). In fact, in a structural analysis of quantifiers along the lines of May (1977), the Q- features should not lower, in order to stay in a position to bind the lower trace as a variable. 3.7. Binding of anaphors As can be seen in (25)-(26), anaphors tolerate binding with any of the orders when a single clause is involved, including binding into the subject. 2~ However, an 2t According to Mamoru Saito (personal communication), there is an order restriction when the anaphor is inside the subject: he finds (26a), with the anaphor preceding the antecedent, clearly less acceptable than (26b). The following contrast, from Boskovic (2000), shows that a subject-contained anaphor may not be followed by even just a subpart of its antecedent (such as the floated quantifierfutart 'two' in i0. (i) Gakusei-o John-ga futari sikatta. students-acc John-nom two scolded 'Students, John scolded two.' (ii) *Gakusei-o otagai-no sensei-ga futari sikatta. students-acc each other-gen teachers-horn two scolded 'Students, each other's teachers scolded two.' (iii) Gakusei-o otagai-no sensei-ga sikatta. 'Students, each other's teachers scolded.' 272 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 argument of an embedded predicate cannot bind an anaphor in a matrix NP, even if the antecedent appears in front of the matrix NP (27): (25) a. John-ga zibunzisin-o semeta. John-NOM self-ACC blamed 'John blamed himself.' b. Zibunzisin-o John-ga semeta. (26) a. Otagai-no hahaoya-ga Mary to Pam-ni atta. Each-other-GEN mother-NOM [Mary and Pam]-DAT met 'Each other' s mother met Mary and Pam.' b. Mary to Pam-ni otagai-no hahaoya-ga atta. (27) a. *Otagai-no hahaoya-ga John-ga Each-other-GEN mother-NOM John-NOM atta to omotteiru. met COMP think 'Each others mothers think that John met Mary and Pare.' b. *Mary to Pam-ni otagai-no hahaoya-ga John-ga atta to omotteiru. Mary to Pam-ni [Mary and Pam]-DAT In a language like Japanese that does not use juxtaposition, hence structure, to encode predicate-argument relations, the locality conditions on anaphors cannot be determined by structural properties. Assuming that case marking triggers the forma- tion of GF-packets, such a packet defines a locality domain: the co-arguments of a predicate. Such a 'predicate-mate' condition on anaphors is not specific to 'less structural' languages, but actually holds generally: thus, the c-command and locality domain conditions defined for the application of conditions A and B of the binding theory in structural languages like English are actually 'predicate-mate' conditions encoded in structural terms. This is explicitly recognized by Pollard and Sag (1992), Reinhart and Reuland (1993), and implicitly by Chomsky (1995), who uses the notion of Complete Functional Complex (CFC) in his definition of Governing Cate- gory, the domain of application of these conditions :22 (28) Governing Category (Chomsky's 222): The GC for A is the minimal CFC that contains ct and a governor of ct and in which ct's binding condition could, in principle, be satisfied. B&T's analysis of the effect of scrambling on anaphors is parallel to their analy- sis of Q-NPs and suffers from the same weaknesses. 22 Careful readers of Chomsky's text will have noticed that the notion of governor in (28) should be dispensed with since it plays no discriminating role anymore. We are therefore left with a definition that is truly universal and does not contain a reference to a property of a specific type of language, namely the structural notion of 'governor'. D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 273 3.8. Condition C of the binding theory In single clauses, condition C violations hold regardless of the order: this holds for scrambling constructions as in (29b) or multiple subject constructions as in (30): (29) a. *Kare,-ga John~-no hahaoya-o semeta. He-NOM John-GEN mother-ACC blamed 'He blamed John's mother.' b. *Johni-no hahaoya-o karel-ga semeta. (30) *Johni-no heya-ga karel-ga ansindekiru. John-GEN room-NOM he-NOM can-feel-relieved 'It is John's room in which he can feel relieved.' Under the assumption that Japanese does not use structure to encode predicate- argument relations, this is expected, since NPs are at the same 'level' irrespective of the order in (29) and (30): the NPs are part of the same GF-packet. In B&T's analysis, the scrambled NP is adjoined to IP, so that the structure of (29b) is as in (31): (31) *[ie[Johni-no hahaoya-o] [ie kare,-ga semeta]]. According to them, the sentence is ungrammatical if kare-ga is coindexed with John-no because the pronoun c-commands the R-expression, thus violating condition C: "The lower IP in [(31)] is just a segment of the two-segment category IP, so that the subject in [Spec, IP] c-commands the object in the IP-adjoined position, with the 'branching node' in the formulation of c-command understood as a category, not as a segment." (Boskovic and Takahashi, 1998: 361) It seems to me that there is a technical error here: if c-command is defined on a category rather than a segment, then the category IP dominates the subject (all its segments do), but the category does not dominate the scrambled object (only a segment of IP does), so that the subject does not c-command the object. What they seem to require is that the topmost segment of a projection defines the domain of c- command. Of course, it is possible to modify the notion of c-command in order to obtain the correct results. Curiously, the adjustments needed for (29)-(30) conspire to get the same situation as would obtain if structure was not involved here. Adjustments of the definition of command to fit the facts can be seen as evidence that we have not yet attained the proper definition and that this is work in progress: we have seen count- less definitions of 'command' in the last three decades and one would hope that a single notion will eventually fit all the analyses that make use of this kind of notion. The notion plays a central role in many aspects of analyses based on fixed positions: the looseness with which it is adjusted to the facts is an indication that it is not grounded in deep principles, that it lacks explanatory adequacy and is just a descrip- tive device. 274 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 Moreover, sentences involving anaphors as in (25) above should be ungrammati- cal under a standard structural analysis: if the pronoun c-commands its antecedent in (29a-b), it certainly looks like the anaphor does too in (25a-b). The grammaticality of the latter suggests that the relation between an anaphor and its antecedent is asym- metric, not in structural terms, but in referential dependency, as advocated by Rein- hart (1983) and Bouchard (1984). 3.9. Position of verbs In Japanese, verbs appear in sentence final position, where they are stacked in an order of decreasing embedding, the first one being the most embedded, the last one being the matrix verb. In my analysis, this means that Juxtaposition is used to encode relations among predicates, as well as the relation between this block of ordered predicates and the block of unordered arguments. The language is head-f'mal in both cases: the head verb follows a dependent predicate, and the block of verbs follows the block of arguments. The property of being head-final (or head-initial) falls under an optimal approach to parameterization. The relation established between two elements a and fl is licensed by properties of selection or modification: an element is combined with another to add something to it, either an argument or a modifier. There is always a fundamental asymmetry like this at the level of semantic combination. Let us use the general terms functor and dependent to refer to these elements of the semantic asym- metry. Something must indicate which one of a or fl acts as a functor and which one as a dependent. When Juxtaposition of sound-bearing elements is the means to encode this relation, a temporal linearization results from having two elements share a temporal edge: at the PF interface, a either precedes or follows ft. Therefore, there is also a fundamental asymmetry in temporal Juxtaposition which derives from inherent physiological properties of the human sensory and motor apparatus. Since linearization reveals the existence of the semantic combination and since both exhibit a fundamental asymmetry, it is natural for the asymmetries to be matches in a consistent manner: linearization is a natural means to indicate which of a or fl is the functor in this semantic combination. Therefore, I assume that the central lin- earization parameter is defined on the functor-dependent relation established between two elements: (32) Linearization parameter: The functor precedes/follows its dependent. A language must choose between the two possibilities of linearization in order for the information to be consistently encoded. In Japanese, the option selected is to have the head follow the dependent. This is an optimal parameter since it arises from the interaction of necessity and constraints on usability: when temporal Juxtaposi- tion operates, the output must be ordered. Linearization parameters are implicit in most analyses, including that of Kayne (1994), where the notion of complement plays a key role in the Linear Correspon- D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 275 dence Axiom: the notion of complement, which is defined by a functor relation, determines whether branching will be nonsegmented (for complements) or seg- mented (for non-complements), with subsequent effects on order. Approaches based on functional features scattered in a structure and checking theory may give the impression that they involve no linearization parameter. In fact, this kind of analysis requires ordering constraints for the functional features. For example, Giorgi and Pianesi (1996: 140-141) propose the following means to derive the hierarchical order of Functional Categories: (33) Universal ordering constraint: The features are ordered so that F l > F 2 iff the checking of F t precedes the checking of F2. "Since checking can only take place by means of raising not lowering, a univer- sal order of checking entails that the nodes of the structure that is projected are ordered" (Giorgi and Pianesi, 1996: 140-141). Listing features in this way with ordering numbers simply stipulates the solution. Moreover, note that the constraint in (33) does exactly the kind of work that selec- tional properties do. Given the dubious status of functional categories that are semantically totally empty, it is highly likely that the redundancy introduced by (33) can be resolved by dropping them altogether. 4. Conclusion If the whole system is taken into consideration, an approach based on functional features scattered in a structure and checking theory requires idiosyncratic state- ments about ordering to account for languages with a relatively rigid order of con- stituents, whereas an approach based on a linearization parameter such as (32) is linked to fundamental, necessary properties of language. If we broaden the picture to languages that use means other than Juxtaposition to code grammatical information, theories based on fixed positions come out as even more stipulative, less explanatory. In this kind of theory, linguistic information is always encoded by phrasal-structural means. Whenever a language happens to have NPs that are overtly marked for Case and freely ordered, special features have to be posited that 'move things around' fairly freely. But the correlation between case marking and freedom of order is a mystery. In the theory I propose, the results are attained because the analytical apparatus is directly linked to elements that arise from conceptual necessity, elements from the interfaces of form and of meaning, whereas in the other two theories, results are not linked directly to interfaces, but come from the postulation of second-order features in the computational system and the like. This difference is critical. It is of foremost importance to link one's theoretical apparatus to elements which bear necessity and universality, since these are the concepts which allow us to account for the objectiv- ity of empirical knowledge. In the study of the language faculty, the most directly 276 D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 accessible elements which are necessary and universal are those from the interfaces: meanings are restricted to notions that may link up to our conception of the outside world, and forms are restricted to the physical means available in our articulatory- perceptual system. Facts are only recoverable through the interfaces, not through the computational system: so the link with the interfaces is the link with the empirical basis. This direct link with the empirical basis of the interfaces involves a notion of uni- versality which is fundamentally different from the one behind a theory based on a particular mode of coding, such as fixed positions or functional marking. Whereas the latter stipulates that a particular mode of coding is a property which all languages have, I take as a universal the choice among the modes of coding which derive from unavoidable properties of the articulatory-perceptual system of human beings. While there is a necessity to encode semantic information into some form accessible to the A-P system (otherwise language is unusable among speakers), there is no necessity that diverse modes of coding be recoded into a particular one. If I am correct, uni- versality should not be sought in recoding all modes into a particular one, but in dis- covering the properties of the general computational process compatible with all four modes of coding. References Aissen, Judith, 1989. Agreement controlers and Tzotzil conntatives. Language 65, 518-536. Barwise, Jon and John Perry, 1980. The situation underground. In: J. Barwise and I. Sag (eds.), Stanford Working Papers in Semantics, 31-93. Stanford, KY. Boskovic, Zeljko, 2000. On scrambling. Talk at Universit6 Paris 8. Boskovic, Zeljko and Daiko Takahashi, 1998. Scrambling and last resort. Linguistic Inquiry 29(3), 347-366. Bouchard, Denis, 1984. On the content of empty categories. Dordrecht: Foris. Bouchard, Denis, 1995. The semantics of syntax. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press. Bouchard, Denis, 1996. Sign languages and language universals: The status of order and position in grammar. Sign Language Studies 91,101-160. Chomsky, Noam, 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, Noam, 1999. Derivation by phase. MIT Occasional Papers in Linguistics 18. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Cooper, Robin, 1983. Quantification and syntactic theory. Dordrecht: Reidel. Frazier, Lynn, 1987. Syntactic processing: Evidence from Dutch. Natural Language and Linguistic The- ory 5, 519--559. Giorgi, Alessandra and Fabio Pianesi, 1996. Verb movement in Italian and syncretic categories. Probus 8(2), 137-160. Homstein, Norbert, 1984. Logic as grammar. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Jackendoff, Ray, 1987. The status of thematic relations in linguistic theory. Linguistic Inquiry 18, 369-411. Jackendoff, Ray, 1990. Semantic structures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Kamp, Hans and Barbara Partee, 1995. Prototype theory and compositionality. Cognition 57, 129-191. Kayne, Richard, 1994. The antisymmetry of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Keenan, Edward, 1978. Language variation and the logical structure of universal grammar. In: Hansja- cob Seiler (ed.), Language universals, 89-123. Tiibingen: Gunter Narr. May, Robert, 1977. The grammar of quantification. Doctoral dissertation, MIT. Meillet, Antoine, 1949. Camct~res g6n6raux des langues germaniques. Paris: Hachette. D. Bouchard / Lingua 111 (2001) 247-277 277 Meillet, Antoine, 1950. Les dialectes indo-europ6ens. Paris: Champion. Neeleman, Ad and Fred Weerman, 1999. Flexible syntax. Dordrecht: Kl@uwers Academic Publishers. Partee, Barbara H., 1996. The development of formal semantics in linguistic theory. In: Shalom Lappin (ed.), The handbook of contemporary semantic theory, 11-38. Oxford: Blackwell. Pollard, Carl and Ivan Sag, 1992. Anaphors in English and the scope of the binding theory. Linguisnc Inquiry 23, 261-305. Postal, Paul, 1972. The best theory. In: Stanley Peters (ed.), Goals of linguistic theory, 131-170. Engle- wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. Reinhart, Tanya, 1983. Anaphora and semantic interpretation. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press. Reinhart, Tanya and Eric Reuland, 1993. Reflexivity. Linguistic Inquiry 24, 657-720. Rizzi, Luigi, 1990. Relativized minimality. Cambridge; MA: MIT Press. Saito, Mamoru, 1985. Some asymmetries in Japanese and thetr theoretical imlications. Doctoral disser- tation, MIT. Saito, Mamoru, 1989. Scrambling as semantically vacuous A'-movement, In: Mark R. Baltin and Anthony Kroch (eds.), Alternative concepts of phrase structure, 182-200. Chicago, IL: The Univer- sity of Chicago Press. Saito, Mamoru, 1994. Additional-wh effects and the adjunction site theory. Journal of East Asian Lin- guistics 3, 195-240. Santo, Mamoru and Naoki Fukui, 1998. Order in phrase structure and movement. Linguistic Inquiry 29, 439-474. 