ELSEVIER Lmgua 111 (2001) 315-376 L  gua www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Structural case in Finnish Paul Kiparsky* Department of Linguistics, Stanford Umverstty, Stanford, CA 94305, USA Abstract Finnish syntax and inflectional morphology support a parallel decomposition of abstract case and morphosyntactic/morphological case into two binary features. The correspondence between these levels is govemed by ranked violable faithfulness constraints. The constraints are shown to account for the major clause types of Finnish, and their generality is demon- strated with a rudimentary typology of ergative case systems. © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Case; Abstract case; Grammatical relations; Morphology; Word order; Ergativ- ity; Finnish syntax; Optimality theory; Existential sentences I. Introduction 1.1. Morphological case and abstract case The fundamental fact that any theory of case must address is that morphological form and syntactic function do not stand in a one-to-one correspondence, yet are sys- tematically related. Theories of case differ in whether they define case categories at a single structural level of representation, or at two or more levels of representation. For theories of the first type, the mismatches raise a dilemma when morphological form and syntactic function diverge. Which one should the classification be based on? Generally, such single-level approaches determine the case inventory on the basis of morphology using paradigmatic contrast as the basic criterion, and propose rules or constraints that map the resulting cases to grammatical relations. ~ Warm thanks Arto Anttila for always being ready to share his judgments of the Finnish data, to Kris- ti~n ,~u-nason for suggesting the possibility of the DEP constraints discussed in Section 3, and to Ida Toivonen, Diane Nelson, and Satu Manninen for comments on a draft. The responsibility for errors of fact or interpretation is mine. * E-mail: kiparsky@csli.stanford.edu 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PH: S0024-3841 (00)00035-8 316 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 Multi-level case theories deal with the mismatch between morphological form and syntactic function by distinguishing MORPHOLOGICAL CASE on the basis of form and ABSTRACT CASE on the basis of function. Approaches that distinguish between abstract case and morphological case in this way typically envisage an interface called 'spellout' that determines the relationship between them. In practice, this out- look has served to legitimize a neglect of inflectional morphology. The neglect is understandable, for syntacticians' interest in morphological case is naturally less as a system in its own right than as a diagnostic for abstract case and grammatical rela- tions. But it is not entirely benign: compare the abundance of explicit proposals about how abstract cases are assigned with the minimal attention paid to how they are morphologically realized. The position taken here is that the theory of case belongs both to morphology and to syntax. It must draw on morphological principles to explain the characteristic organization of case paradigms, such as the patterns of syncretism and zero allomor- phy that recur in language after language. It must draw on syntactic principles to account for the relation of abstract case to phrase structure and to thematic structure or argument structure. And it must develop a constrained theory of the interface between morphological case categories and the abstract case categories defined in the syntax. Finnish poses interesting challenges on all three fronts. The identification of the case categories at the morphological level is problematic in several respects. How- ever it is solved, the 'spellout' relationship is far from trivial. At the same time, Finnish also calls into question the notion that abstract case is predictable by general principles from phrase structure or from some level of thematic or argument struc- ture. An answer to these challenges is attempted in this paper. Using the approach to morphological case and abstract case of Kiparsky (1997), coupled with the OT Cor- respondence Theory of McCarthy and Prince (1995), Finnish clause structure can be derived by the interaction of constraints of considerable cross-linguistic generality. The analysis will show that abstract cases are predictable from thematic structure to a much greater extent than is apparent from the extraordinarily diverse variety of clause types. 1.2. The Finnish case system Pedagogical grammars from Set~il~i (1880) on have presented the case system of Finnish nouns and pronouns as in (1), where the first four rows of the paradigm make up the subsystem of STRUCTURAL CASES that is the topic of this article. P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 317 (1) Nouns: 'bear' Singular Plural Pronouns: 'you' Singular Plural Nominative karhu karhu-t Accusative karhu, karhu-n karhu-t Genitive karhu-n karhu-j-en Partitive karhu-a karhu-j-a Essive karhu-na karhu-i-na Translative karhu-ksi karhu-i-ksi Inessive karhu-ssa karhu-i-ssa Elative karhu-sta karhu-i-sta IUative karhu-un karhu-i-hin Adessive karhu-lla karhu-i-lla Ablative karhu-lta karhu-i-lta Allative karhu-lle karhu-i-lle Abessive karhu-tta karhu-i-tta Comitative karhu-i-ne- Instrumental karhu-i-n sina te sinu-t teid~i-t sinu-n teidii-n sinu-a tei-tii slnu-na sinu-ksi slnu-ssa slnu-sta smu-un sinu-lla sinu-lta sinu-lle smu-tta tei-nii tei-ksi tei-ssii tei-stii tei-hin tei-ll~i tei-ltii tei-lle tei-tta Conspicuously, the accusative singular of nouns is the only slot in the whole para- digm that has two endings. Their distribution is governed by 'Jahnsson's Rule': (2) JAHNSSON'S RULE (first, informal version) Verbs which have no overt subjects govern the endingless accusative, verbs with overt subjects govern the -n accusative. Exactly what it means for a verb to have no overt subject is a complicated matter that will occupy us in Section 2.1.3. For now, compare the endingless object karhu of the imperative verb in (3a) with the -n marked object (karhun in (3b)). Sinut is there to illustrate that pronouns always take -t accusatives. (3) a. Anna Mati-n niih-dii karhu /sinu-t! Let(Imp) M.-Gen see-Inf bear-Nom /you-Acc 'Let Matti see the(a) bear / you!' b. Matti anta-a hiine-n n~ih-dii karhu-n / sinu-t. M.-Nom let-3Sg him-Gen see-Inf bear-Acc/ you-Acc 'Matti will let him see the(a) bear / you.' Recent work has completely upset this traditional view of the Finnish structural case system. Reviving an early proposal by Jahnsson (1871) many linguists now regard the so-called 'endingless accusative' simply as a nominative (Timberlake, 318 P. Ktparsky / Lmgua 111 (2001) 315-376 1974; Taraldsen, 1985; Milsark, 1986; Mitchell, 1991; Maling, 1993; Toivainen, 1993; Vilkuna, 1996; Nelson, 1998). A minority fold the -n accusative with the gen- itive into one case (Penttila, 1963: 149; Vilkuna, 1989: 7; Vainikka, 1993). ~ Carl- son (1978) on the contrary splits -n into three cases: genitive, accusative, and dative, the latter when it behaves as an inherent case, as in Matin and hdnen in (3). These views reflect, in part implicitly, the difference between single-level and multi-level case theories. In the next section we will begin to distinguish between them on empirical grounds. 1.3. Morphological case: Coordination and agreement 1.3.1. The morphological system of structural cases Taken by itself, morphology favors the paradigm in (4) for the structural cases, rather the textbook paradigm in (1). (4) 'bear' 'you' Singular Plural Singular Plural Nominative karhu karhu-t sinai te Accusative -- -- sinu-t te-i-d~i-t Genitive karhu-n karhu-j-en sinu-n te-i-d~i-n Partitive karhu-a karhu-j-a sinu-a te-i-t~i As a morphological paradigm, (4) is preferable to (1) for both conceptual and empirical reasons. (1) in effect amounts to treating -0 and -n as suppletive allo- morphs of accusative case, which is at odds with the fact that their distribution is determined syntactically by Jahnsson's Rule. However exactly that generalization is formalized, it is not the sort of condition that should govern allomorphy, on the stan- dard understanding of how morphology is organized. (4) rids the system of this unwanted syntactic conditioning of allomorphy. Better still, (4) eliminates the entire -t - -n ~ 6 allomorphy itself, a step all the more welcome because such suppletion (as opposed to systematic morphophonolog- ical alternation such as consonant gradation and vowel harmony) is uncommon in Finnish morphology. (4) brings the endings and morphological cases closer to the ideal one-to-one correspondence in the other direction as well, by reducing the amount of case syncretism: all endingless case forms are now nominatives, and all-n case forms are genitives; only -t still has two functions. Moreover, (4) avoids the coincidence that all three putative endings of the accusative in (1) are identical with the ending of another structural case. Vainikka (1993) further argues that the elative is also a structural case. P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 319 This is not to say that suppletion and syncretism are impossible, or even that they must be avoided at all costs. Obviously they must be recognized wherever the facts demand it. The argument is just based on the premise that a morphological system is preferable in so far as it does not have them. Nor am I claiming that morphological alternations are a priori better dealt with in the syntax, merely that syntactic condi- tioning is evidence for morphemic status (as opposed to allomorphy, which should be dealt with within the morphology). The presumption therefore is in favor of treat- ing the -t - -n - 0 alternation in the syntax, or at the syntax-morphology interface, as an alternation between different morphological cases. I will now provide syntactic arguments that the -t - -n - 0 alternation indeed belongs in the syntax, and that the three endings mark distinct morphological cases which are contextually condi-tioned realizations of abstract accusative case. Even the remaining morphological complication in (4), the absence of accusative case in nouns, will be seen to follow from general case assignment constraints (Section 3). 1.3.2. Endingless objects are morphologically nominative A body of syntactic evidence that (4) rather than the traditional paradigm (1) gives the right morphological cases of Finnish comes from case parallelism between pronouns and nouns in coordina-tion and agreement structures. In coordination, a shared argument must be assigned the same case by each of the conjoined predicates. A nominative subject then counts as parallel to a nominative (noun) object, but not to an accusative (pronominal) object (Vilkuna, 1989: 155). 2 (5) a. Mikko pyfrty-i ja (Mikko) kanne-ttiin ulos. Mikko(Nom) faint-Past(3Sg) and (Mikko(Nom)) carry-Pass(3Sg)out 'Mikko fainted and (Mikko) was carried out.' b. H~in pyfrty-i ja *(h~e-t) kanne-ttiin ulos. He(Nom) faint-Past(3Sg) and (he-Acc) carry-Pass(3Sg) out 'He fainted and (he) was carried out.' Case system (4) provides a simple explanation why the ellipsis in the second con- junct is allowed in (5a) but not in (5b). Active verbs, such as pyfrtyi 'fainted', assign nominative case to their sole argument. 'Passive' verbs, such as kannettiin 'was car- ried', assign morphological nominative case to their sole overt argument if it is nom- inal (Mikko), and morphological accusative case if it is pronominal (hdnet). The ellipsis in (5a) is grammatical because the shared argument Mikko gets nominative case from both verbs. The ellipsis in (5b) is ungrammatical because the shared argu- ment gets morphological nominative case from the first verb, and morphological accusative case from the second verb. The case system (1) does not allow us to state the generalization this way, for according to it, Mikko and hdnet as objects of 2 Vilkuna's generalization is surely correct for formal registers. In informal speech and writing, occasional exceptions do occur: ... kun vodkaa tuli viihiin lisiia, hiin (Nom) kuukahtt pi~yd?in alle ja kannettiin ulos. 'When a little more vodka came, he slumped under the table and was carded out.' (Arvo Tuominen, Kremlin kellot, 1956: 201). 320 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 kannettiin in (5) are both accusative. In that system, then, there would be no ratio- nale for the contrast between (5a) and (5b). A second argument for (4) over (1) is based on the interrogative pronoun kuka 'who'. It has a unique suppletive case paradigm comprised of several stems (ku-, ke-, kene-), and allows both the nominal and the pronominal type of inflection in some cases. In particular, as the object of a passive or other subjectless verb it can be either nominative, like nouns and determiners, or accusative, like personal pronouns: (6) Kuka n~ih-tiin? Kene-t nah-tiin? Who(Nom) see-PassPast who-Acc see-PassPast 'Who was seen?' When kuka agrees with a noun or adjective, however, the accusative is excluded. This situation arises in combinations such as kuka muu 'who else', or in the idiomatic kuka kumma 'who on earth?', literally 'what strange one? '. (7) shows that only the nominative form can be the object of a passive verb. (7) a. Kuka kumma / kuka muu n/ih-tiin? who(Nom) strange(Nom) /who(Nom) other(Nom)see-PassPast 'Who on earth was seen?' 'Who else was seen?' b. *Kene-t kumma / kene-t muu n/ih-tiin? who-Acc strange(Nom) / who-Acc other(Nom) see-PassPast 'Who on earth was seen?' 'Who else was seen?' c. Ke-t~i kumma-a / ke-t~i / muu-ta odotet-tiin? who-Part strange-Part who-Part other-Part wait-for-PassPast 'Who on earth was waited for? ' 'Who else was waited for?' According to (4), endingless nominals such as kumma in (7a) are nominative; hence kuka kumma and kuka muu in (7a) satisfy the requirement that the constituents of an NP must agree in case, just as ketii kummaa and ketii muuta as objects of the partitive-assigning verb odottaa 'wait' in (7c) do. (7b) is then ungrammatical simply because it violates case agreement. On the traditional scheme in (1), however, kumma and muu are 'endingless accusatives', hence have the same case as a pronominal accusative in -n and ought to agree with it, so that (7b) should be grammatical. 1.3.3. Objects in -n are morphologically genitive The data so far considered show that endingless objects are morphologically nom- inative rather than accusative. A parallel argument shows that -n objects are mor- phologically genitive rather than accusative, contrary to the mixed case system pro- posed by most recent writers on Finnish syntax. Consider the same idiom as an object of a regular active verb: (8) a. Kene-n kumma-n h~n n~ik-i? Who-Gen strange-Gen s/he see-PassPast 'Who on earth did s/he see?' P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 321 b. *Kene-t kumma-n h~in n~ik-i? Who-Acc strange-Gen s/he see-Past 'Who on earth did s/he see?' According to (4) kumman is genitive, so the ungrammaticality of *kenet kumman in (8b) follows from the case clash with accusative kenet. If kumman were accusative here, as per (1), then it should satisfy the case agreement requirement and its ungrammaticality would go unexplained. A small class of epithets, such as parka, raukka 'poor', combine with both nouns and pronouns, including personal pronouns. Since personal pronouns, unlike the interrogative pronoun just discussed, strictly require the pronominal inflection, the corresponding case clash now causes an actual paradigmatic gap. Pronouns can com- bine freely with epithets in all cases except as 'accusative' objects, as in (9c), where some speakers reject all combinations. This is just the case where it is impossible to satisfy simultaneously both agreement and the requirement that the pronoun be mor- phologically accusative and that the nonpronominal epithet be morphologically gen- itive. (The version marked with ' ?' is judged acceptable by some speakers and unac- ceptable by others.) (9) a. Min~i parka joudu-i-n siivoa-ma-an. I(nom) poor(Nom) get-Past-lSg clean-Inf-Illat 'Poor me ended up cleaning.' b. Minu-n para-n ol-i siivotta-va. I-Gen poor-Gen be-Past(3Sg) clean-Part 'Poor me had to clean up.' c. ?He pan-i-vat minu-t para-n they(Nom) put-Past-3Pl I-Acc poor-Gen parka, *minu-n para-n poor(Nom), I-Gen poor-Gen) 'They made poor me clean up.' d. Minu-a raukka-a ei piiaste-tty muka-an. I-Part poor-Part not(3Sg) let-PPP with-Ill 'Poor me was not allowed to join.' e. Minu-lla rauka-lla ei ole mi-taiin. I-Adess poor-Adess not(3Sg) be anything-Part 'Poor me has nothing.' f. Mi-ten teidii-n raukko-j-en kiiv-i? what-Adv you-PIGen poor-PIGen go-Past(3Sg) 'What happened to you poor people?' siivoa-ma-an. (*minu-t clean-Inf-Illat (I-Acc No explanation for the peculiarity of of (9c) is available under the assumption that -n and -t are the respective allomorphs of accusative case in nouns and pronouns. The evidence discussed in this section shows that 'taking morphology seriously' pays off in the syntax as well. The morphologically motivated case paradigm in (4) permits the formulation of two syntactic generalizations which are lost under the 322 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 traditional system in (1), namely that coordinated NPs must agree in case, and that modifiers agree with their heads in case. 1.4. Abstract case 1.4.1. The need for abstract case The textbook doctrine however fares much better as a theory of the abstract case categories of Finnish, which is of course why it was devised in the first place and why it remains useful in practical grammars. It recognizes an abstract accusative case realized by the endings -0, -n, -t in object function, and even informally makes a distinction between the genitive and dative functions of -n, referring to the latter as the 'dative-genitive'. Assigning the morphological categories of (4) directly would indeed be needlessly complex. Every rule or constraint that relates to accusative case would, if reformu- lated in terms of (4), have to repeat the three-way disjunction of nominative, geni- tive, and accusative case together with the conditions by which they are distributed. It is simpler to factor out these morphological alternations and to express the rules in terms of abstract accusative case, with the morphological realization of accusative case stated just once at the syntax-morphology interface. In traditional Finnish grammar, abstract case is assigned on the basis of grammat- ical and semantic relations, and in turn spelled out by the appropriate endings. GB on the other hand reduces grammatical relations to abstract case defined in terms of configurational relations. Other modem grammatical theories, notably LFG, elimi- nate abstract cases as primitives, and map grammatical relations directly to morpho- logical case. Each of these reductionist moves recognizes an important generaliza- tion about the organization of grammar, but each has its own problems too. 1.4.2. Morphological cases as realizations of grammatical relations One difficulty with treating the assignment of structural case as a direct mapping from grammatical relations to morphological case is that even elements which do not bear any grammatical relation can bear structural case. The best-known example is so-called default structural case, such as the nominative case assigned to left-dislo- cated and other syntactically isolated NPs (the nominativus pendens of classical grammar, see Schiitze, this volume). 3 Trickier to deal with is the fact that abstract accusative case is assigned to a class of adverbial measure phrases, which display the same -n M 0 alternation conditioned by Jahnsson's Rule as objects do, though they are not objects (Maling, 1993). Moreover, like objects they get partitive case under negation (see (10c)). 3 For GB the a corresponding dilemma is whether default case is purely morphological, or syntactically visible as abstract Case. Presumably it should be syntactically visible in order to allow syntactically iso- lated NPs to pass the Case Filter. On the other hand, it seems that visibility of default abstract case would nullify the effects of the Case Filter. P. Kiparsky / Lmgua 111 (2001) 315-376 323 (10) a. Opiskel-i-n vuode-n. study-Past-lSg year-Gen 'I studied a year.' b. Opiskel-tiin vuosi. study-PastPass year-(Nom) 'People/we studied a year.' c. E-n opiskel-lut vuot-ta-kaan. Not-lSg study-PfP year-Part-even 'I didn't study even a year.' These measure phrase adverbials are not complements by any other syntactic crite- rion, but must be adjuncts, as Hakulinen and Karlsson (1979: 216) point out. In Finnish, a general constraint ('Siro's Law') prohibits more than one object in a VP. Measure adverbials however can co-occur with objects, and there can be several of them per clause. Unlike objects, they are immune to aspectual partitivity (Section 2.1.4). Further, they neither raise nor allow predication of any sort, nor passivize: (11) H61kk~is-i-n tunni-n. jog-Past-lSg hour-Gen 'I jogged an hour.' *Hflkk~iii-ma-ni tunti. jog-3Inf(Nom)- 1SgPoss hour(Nom) 'The hour jogged by me.' Let us add that abstract accusative cannot be assigned as default case, since Finnish has the above-mentioned default nominatives as well. The conclusion is that struc- tural case has other functions than marking grammatical relations, and that these functions are not restricted to default case marking. 4 Even when it is possible to formulate rules that assign morphological case based on gram-matical relations it may not be the right approach. In present linguistic the- ories, grammatical relations and morphological cases are formally unrelated cate- gories. It is not clear how such theories can provide any intrinsic reason why any particular grammatical relation should be expressed by any particular morphological case. For example, why are there no cases that mark subjects and obliques (but not objects)? Cases are clearly not mere Saussurian tokens of difference that carve up the grammatical space in arbitrary ways. 1.4.3. Morphological case as spellout of abstract case Theories that operate with abstract case are - at least in principle - in a better position to provide a principled solution to the 'spellout' problem. For example, if abstract Nominative Case is taken to be the same category as morphological nomi- native case, defined at a different level of representation, the relation between them would be nonarbitrary, as desired. But the sense in which abstract 'Nominative Case' This is not to say that the ass~grtment of structural case to adjuncts is unconstrained. Maling (1993), citing A. Li, makes the interesting suggestion that structural case marks adverbs only as a last resort when there is no suitable semantic case in the language. See Wechsler and Lee (1996) for a theory of direct case assignment to adjuncts. 324 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 and morphological 'nominative case' are instantiations of the same category at dif- ferent levels would have to be clarified. Just giving them the same name and spelling one with a capital letter is not a theoretical proposal but a pun. Another way to put it is that there needs to be some explanation for why particular Cases are assigned in particular syntactic positions. Moreover, there would have to be some account of the mismatches between the two levels, such as, in Finnish, nominative objects and gen- itive subjects. In fact, the assumption that each abstract structural Case is assigned in a specific structural position has proved extremely difficult to implement in Finnish within standard varieties of GB. Recent analyses have been forced to weaken the theory by parametrizing the Case Filter and/or stipulating special conditions on both halves of Burzio's generalization, or to posit otherwise unmotivated processes such as case assignment at both D-structure and at S-structure, movement of case-marked ele- ments, movement of the case features themselves, or both. The following sum- maries of the most important of these proposal are merely a brief guide for the reader; space does not allow a full discussion of them here. Mitchell (1991) proposes that nominative case is assigned to Specifiers of an intermediate functional category called PredP. It is morphologically realized as nom- inative-accusative case (i.e. as accusative with pronouns), by virtue of binding a trace in object position. From Spec(PredP) subjects can be raised to Spec(AgrP), where their nominative are 'strengthened' by becoming coindexed with [+ AGR]. Such a strengthened nominative is realized as morphological nominative case. Vainikka (1993: 158) treats objects in -n as having genitive case, which is assigned to the subject in Spec-VP, gets stranded there when the subject is raised to Spec-IP, and then percolates down to the object. When there is no subject in Spec- VP and therefore no genitive assigned there, the object remains caseless (nomina- tive, in traditional terms), except when it is a pronoun, in which case it is marked accusative. Nelson (1998: Ch. 4) lets nominative case be assigned by Tense/Mood either under Spec-head agreement or under government; when the verb does not license an external argument in spec-AgrP coindexed with AGR, an argument moves to a posi- tion where it can receive nominative case from Tense/Mood. She hypothesizes that the internal nominal argument of subjectless verbs is morphologically endingless because it is assigned abstract Case twice: nominative by Tense/Mood at S-structure, and accusative by the verb at D-structure (Burzio's generalization being assumed to be inapplicable for pronouns in Finnish). Taking a rather different tack within the same theoretical framework, Reime (1993) locates the case alternations at the morphology/syntax interface, where abstract accusative is spelled out as -n when a visibility requirement on PF interpre- tation requires an overt ending, otherwise as zero by the Principle of Full Interpre- tation. 1.4.4. The nominative as unmarked case Reime's invocation of PF visibility brings out an interesting functionality behind Jahnsson's Rule which has been stressed in earlier work (Hakulinen and Karlsson, P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 325 1979: 186) but is obscured in solutions that seek to derive Jahnsson's Rule from the interaction of case assignment with syntactic movement. This functionality comes out even more clearly in approaches which use a different syntactic toolkit, eschew- ing abstract case and letting morphological case be assigned directly in situ by con- text-dependent rules. A common feature of these solutions is the assumption that nominative case has a privileged status as the 'elsewhere' case of Finnish. 5 Using the case-in-tiers theory of Yip et al. (1987), Maling (1993) derives Jahns- son's rule from the principle that nominative case goes to the highest available grammatical function - to the subject if there is one (in which case the object gets accusative), and to the object otherwise. In Maling's approach, case assignment is seen as the alignment of a case hierarchy with a hierarchy of grammatical functions. In a similar spirit, Toivainen (1993) postulates that nominative case is assigned to internal arguments just in case it cannot be assigned to the subject. 1.4.5. Main features of the present proposal The present analysis has points of contact with much of this work. Like case-in- tiers theory, it exploits the relational character of structural case and the unmarked status of nominative case, without recourse to movement of case-bearing elements or case features, or stranding and percolation of case features. Like GB, it exploits the distinction between morphosyntactic case and abstract Case, though defining abstract case configurationally at the level of Semantic Form rather than at D-Struc- ture or S-Structure. A key move is to treat the two levels of case as formally analo- gous, and the relation between them as one of realization, rather like that between underlying and phonetic representations in phonology. Structural case at each level is defined in terms of prominence relations, and these prominence relations are artic- ulated by means of two features which cross-classify the cases into natural classes. This theory makes it possible to relate the morphologically and syntactically moti- vated case system in (4) to a well-defined set of abstract cases by the interaction of independently motivated constraints. 1.5. Case theory. 1.5.1. The featural decomposition of case The case theory sketched out in Kiparsky (1997) is designed to account for syn- tactic case marking and its relation to agreement and word order, for case morphol- ogy (e.g. patterns of neutralization and null affixation), for relation-changing ('A- movement') processes such as passive, and in general for the relation between thematic roles and syntactic argument structure. 6 Following Bierwisch and Wunder- lich I assume that word meanings are propositional structures built from a fixed vocabulary of primitive constants and variables. Conceptual knowledge interfaces 5 Cf. on the GB side the proposal that nominative is not a case, but rather the absence of case (Milsark, 1985; Taraldsen, 1985; Vamikka, 1993). 6 See also Smith (1992/1996) for a development of an earlier version, and Wundedich (1997), Joppen (this volume), Wunderlich and Lak/imper (this volume) for important related work. 326 P. Ktparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 with syntactic structure at a level of Semantic form where verbs are represented by expressions in which theta-roles are ~,-abstractors over the variables in the function they denote (Bierwisch, 1983, 1986; Bierwisch and Schreuder, 1992). At Semantic form, the semantic role of the variable over which the lambda operator abstracts fixes the theta-role's semantic content, and its depth of embedding fixes its place in the Thematic hierarchy. Structural case at all levels are defined by the cross-classi- fying relational features [_+H(ighest) R(ole)l and [_+L(owest) R(ole)]. 7 At the morphological level, case and agreement morphemes bear these features and assign them to the words that contain them. At the morphosyntactic level, these features are structurally assigned to syntactic constituents by their constituent words and by the syntactic positions they occupy. At the level of Semantic Form, they are structurally assigned to the hierarchically organized theta-roles to identify their abstract Case. Case assignment is here taken to be an optimal match between mor- phosyntactic and abstract case, governed by a set of universal correspondence con- straints with a language-particular ranking. 1.5.2. Abstract case The case features define an inventory of four abstract structural cases, or gram- matical relations, for which I adopt Dixon's mnemonic terms 'A(gent)', 'S(ubject)', 'O(bject)', and 'D(ative)' (Dixon, 1979), though their theoretical status here is not exactly the same as in Dixon's theory. (12) a. A: Transitive Subject [+ HR, -LR] b. S: Intransitive Subject [+ HR, +LR] c. D: Higher (Indirect) Object [-HR, -LR] d. O: Lower (Direct) Object [- HR, +LR] The Semantic Form of the verb pane- 'put', for example, has three theta-roles. 8 (13) pane- 'put': ~,zky~,x Ix CAUSE [BECOME [y AT z ] ] ] They are assigned abstract structural case features on the basis of their prominence. The highest theta-role ~,x (the Agent, or first argument of CAUSE) is [+ HR, -LR], the lowest role ~,z (the location) is [-HR, +LR], and the middle role Ly (the thing put) is [-HR, -LR]. In addition to these features, thetu-roles bear a feature [+SC] which distinguishes those which are eligible for morphological licensing by structural cases from those which can only be licensed by oblique (semantic) cases, prepositions or positional 7 This is comparable to the featural decomposition of grammatical functions by Bresnan and Kanerva (1989) and Alsina (1996) (respectively, [_+r(estricted), +o(bject)] and [+subj, +obj]), building on Levin (1986). The features introduced here, however, are purely relational, and they apply also at the morpho- logical level to define the inflectional case categories. The cross-classification works for Finnish, although it does not reveal its full potential because Finnish lacks ergatlve case. 8 I set aside the inflectionally bound event argument. P. Ktparsky / Lmgua 111 (2001) 315-376 327 case. For example, 'demoted' theta-roles, such as the highest argument of passive predicates in English, are marked by the feature [-SC]. In Finnish, a VP can contain only one direct argument (either a subject or a direct object), which forces demotion of all but one internal theta-role to [-SC]. In pane- 'put' it is the result location which is [-SC], consequently receiving a directional locative case such as the alla- tive or illative, rather than a structural case. Since I will be concentrating on struc- tural case assignment, I will omit specifications of [+SC] unless they are specifically at issue, but it should be understood that every case feature matrix associated with a direct argument contains [+SC]. At the level of abstract Case, the proposed decomposition into features makes it possible to individuate exactly the class of grammatical relations which play a role in syntactic constraints (such as binding, control, and, in some languages, parallelism in coordination). For example, the feature [+HR] defines the relation of grammatical subject. The features also provide the appropriate representation on which valency- changing processes triggered by verb morphology operate in the lexicon. 1.5.3. Morphological and morphosyntactic case The same features [HR] and [LR] also form the basis of the theory of morpho- logical and morphosyntactic structural case. They are morphological features of structural case affixes and agreement affixes and thereby of the words that contain these affixes. At the level of morphosyntax, they are assigned to arguments by the morphological features of their heads and agreement relations, and by the structural positions they occupy. The morphosyntactic and morphological structural cases of Finnish are as follows. 9 (14) -0 nominative [ ] -(t)a partitive [-HR] -t accusative [-HR,-LR] -n genitive [+HR] (the unmarked case) (the unmarked complement case) (the marked complement case) (the specifier case) The glosses give the intuitive content of each feature complex, though they will not be 'true' of each occurrence because morphological cases, on the assumptions of the present proposal at least, are assigned by optimal matching to abstract case subject to a set of ranked violable constraints, not by inviolable unification. Agreement and structural licensing positions assign morphosyntactic case as well. Subject agreement assigns nominative case to the agreeing argument. As for posi- tion, the feature values are associated with structural positions in the obvious way. The external argument position (Spec-IP, in English and Finnish) is [+HR] (mor- phosyntactic nominative case), internal argument positions are [-HR], and non-low- est internal argument positions are in addition [-LR]. Thus the feature [+HR] in effect encodes the distinction between VP-internal and VP-external arguments (in 0 For the evidence that partitive is a structural case see Vainikka and Maling, 1996; Kiparsky, 1998. The representation of gemtive and partitive as respectively [+ HR] and [-HR] corresponds to Vainikka's (1993) insight that genitive is the default specifier case, and that partitive is the default complement case. 328 P. Kiparsky I Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 this framework understood as a property of overt syntax, and not to be confused with the distinction between D-structure internal and external arguments that GB claims lies behind the unaccusative/unergative split). Thus, the first object position licenses the higher (dative, indirect) object and the second licenses the lower (accusative, direct) object. In Finnish, positional case is mostly redundant because morphological case suffices for licensing. Positional case plays an autonomous role only in licens- ing oblique possessors and experiencers as direct arguments, endowing them with some properties of grammatical subjects (Section 2.4). 1.5.4. As tence Case assignment an example of the way case is assigned, let us take the derivation of the sen- in (15). (15) Min~i pan-i-n kirja-n ylahylly-lle. I(Nom) put-Past-lSg book-Gen top-shelf-All 'I put the book on the top shelf.' The theta-roles receive abstract cases structurally as in (13). The arguments to which these theta-roles are assigned receive morphological case in accord with the con- straints governing the correspondence between abstract case and morphological case in Finnish, (16) Abstract Str. Case IP NP I V NP NP I I I t I Min~i panin, e, kirjan yl~yllylle r+ cl r+sc-i.  Morph. Str. Case [ ] [-HR,-LR] - Abstract case features function as constraints on morphosyntactic case. A theta- role's abstract case must optimally match the argument's morphosyntactic case. Because they are categorized by the same features, the relation between these two levels of representation can be established by general principles with without any case-specific grammatical machinery. One-to-one correspondence between abstract case and morphological case comes free; grammatical constraints must do the rest. In Kiparsky (1997), the main work of case assignment was done by Unification, understood as an inviolable constraint requiring that associated feature matrices be P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 329 non-distinct, i. e. not have opposite values for any feature. This works for the simple case systems of Germanic languages, with the help of some underspecification (in particular, nominatives must be featureless). I have not found a good way of dealing with Finnish under those assumptions. Here I instead adopt an Optimality-theoretic approach in which the match is determined by best satisfaction of a ranked constraint system that includes two types of constraints: markedness constraints, which pro- hibit certain case features and combinations of case features, and Faithfulness con- straints which minimize mismaches between abstract and morphosyntactic case fea- tures in both directions (MAx and DEP constraints), l0 Unlike Unification, satisfaction of Faithfulness constraints is gradiently defined, in terms of the number of feature mismatches between the abstract case feature matrix and the morphosyntactic case feature matrix. This becomes important because of a second point of difference, that constraints are violable, and that violations of Faithfulness may be forced by higher- ranked constraints. In such cases, the Faithfulness constraints will select the minimal violation that is consistent with those higher-ranked constraints. The fact that mis- matches are minimized rather than forbidden shifts the burden from the representa- tions to the constraints and makes underspecification less important. A benefit of OT is that the constraints interact to derive generalizations about inflectional morphol- ogy and word order, and about their interrelationship, amounting to a typology of morphosyntactic licensing ('linking'). Independently of the evidence for the morphological case system in (4), this approach is favored by three sorts of syntactic arguments. First, it explains the case alternations as reflexes of universal syntactic constraints that govern split structural case assignment in general, including, most famously, the phenomenon of split erga- tivity.~ l Secondly, it contributes to an understanding of some otherwise difficult syn- tactic phenomena of Finnish, such as existential sentences, the necessive construc- tion, the 'dative-genitive', and anaphora. Third, it helps reconcile the Finnish data with the view that predicate argument structure is derivable from lexical semantics. 1.5.5. The problematic nature of abstract case in Finnish Developing these arguments will require untangling the abstract cases of Finnish, that is, the fundamental grammatical relations, which are, if anything, even more controversial than the identity of its structural cases. Subjects and objects in Finnish stand in a many/many correspondence both to theta-roles and to the structural posi- tions of the arguments to which they are assigned. VP-internal arguments can have any theta-role, including the Agent of verbs like 'work'. The subject of a class of intransitive verbs can be either an external argument or an internal argument. Direct objects come in two varieties, which are positionally indistinguishable from internal subjects, but structurally quite different. ~0 The correspondence theory proposed for phonology (McCarthy and Prince, 1995) has MAX and DEP constraints for segment correspondence and bidirectional IDENT constraints for feature correspondence. Here we will require MAX and DEP constraints for feature correspondence. LI See Itkonen (1974, 1975a) and Nelson (1998) for different proposals to relate syntactic phenomena of Finnish to ergative languages. 330 P. Ktparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 In the face of these problems, some Finnish linguists have begun to operate with a third grammatical relation they call a JECT, defined as a neutralization of the sub- ject and object relations (Karlsson, 1982; Vilkuna, 1989: 156). Laitinen and Vilkuna (1993: 41) distinguish as many as four degrees of subjecthood, and descriptively speaking there are still more of them as we shall see. Vilkuna (1989) concludes that declarative sentences contain a 'pivot' position which normally contains the gram- matical subject if there is one, otherwise an oblique or adverbial, and under certain textually marked conditions houses a topic instead, or remains empty. On syntactic grounds this position can be identified as the Specifier of IP. Thus, Finnish threatens to wreck the twin projects of identifying grammatical relations with structural positions (Chomsky, 1981) and of deriving the syntactic prominence of arguments - whether represented by a hierarchy of grammatical rela- tions, configurationally, by a SUBCAT list, or in some other way - from the promi- nence of their semantic roles (Dowty, 1979, 1991; Giv6n, 1984: Ch. 5; Foley and van Valin, 1984; Bierwisch, 1986; Bresnan and Kanerva, 1989; Jackendoff, 1990; Pollard and Sag, 1994). I shall attempt at least a partial rescue here. I believe I can show that the 'four degrees of subjecthood' are epiphenomenal and arise from the fact that some subject diagnostics relate only to abstract case and others to morphosyntactic case, for rea- sons that can (at least in part) be explained. Where the highest theta-role is not assigned to an external argument, and where the apparently lowest theta-role seems to be more prominent syntactically than it should be, there are in each case clearly identifiable semantic factors at work, even though it is not always clear exactly how they pre-empt the expected argument positions. At any rate, the different types of subjects and objects arise from mismatches between abstract case and position under conditions which can be precisely characterized and to some extent motivated. 2. Clause types Four core sentence types of Finnish are of interest here: - sentences with external subjects (basic sentences), - sentences with internal nominative or partitive subjects (existential sentences), - sentences with no subjects (all passives in Finnish belong here), - sentences with oblique subjects (possessive and necessive sentences). In this section I discuss these four types in turn. 2.1. The basic sentence 2.1.1. External arguments External arguments are canonical subjects. They have nominative case and agree with the verb, unless it is impersonal or nonfinite, in which case they have genitive case. Normally they appear preverbally in a position which can be syntactically P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 331 identified as Spec-IP, but other word orders arise by topicalization and focusing, as in (17b,c,d). 12 (17) a. Sotilaa-t tuhos-i-vat t/ima-n kyl~i-n. soldier-PINom destroy-Past-3P1 this-Gen village-Gen '(The) soldiers destroyed this village.' b. Tam~i-n kyl/i-n tuhos-i-vat sotilaa-t. this-Gen village-Gen destroy-Past-3Pl soldier-PlNom 'As for this village, it was (the) soldiers who destroyed it.' c. T~ima-n kyl/i-n sotilaa-t tuhos-i-vat. this-Gen village-Gen soldier-P1Nom destroy-Past-3P1 'As for this village, (the) soldiers destroyed it.' d. Sotilaa-t tam~i-n kyl/i-n tuhos-i-vat. soldier-PINom-3P1 this-Gen village-Gen destroy-Past 'It was (the) soldiers who destroyed this village.' These processes, and ,~-movement in general, do not seem to interact with licensing, and will not be futher discussed here. The licensing position will be assumed to be the gap in the clause which is bound by the ~.-moved element. External subjects typically receive a 'strong' construal, i.e. a definite, specific, or generic reading, but indefinite readings are also possible under certain conditions. The subject in (17) is systematically ambiguous between a definite and an indefinite reading. On the other hand, the external subject of an intransitive sentence such as Sotilaat tulivat 'The soldiers came' is just about obligatorily definite. To express the corresponding indefinite meaning, the existential construction with an internal sub- ject is used instead. The following tentative generalization holds for Finnish, at least as a first approx- imation: an external subject cannot be indefinite if it can be made an internal argu- ment, i. e. if the sentence can neither be paraphrased as a passive nor as an existen- tial sentence. In other words, external subjects are indefinite only when there is no alternative. For example, Finnish has no personal passives with an agent phrase. So, whereas in (17a), the most felicitous English expression of the indefinite subject reading is the passive ('This village was destroyed by soldiers'), such a passive is not possible in Finnish. Finnish also has no transitive existential sentences. Thus, the syntax does not provide any way to maneuver a transitive subject into internal posi- tion. Therefore it must be external as a last resort, even if that means violating the constraint requiring that external subjects be definite. This kind of interaction can be modeled by ranked constraints in the obvious way. The case properties of external subjects are straightforward. They bear the abstract case feature [+HR], and are licensed by the morphosyntactic case features borne by morphological nominative case, by agreement, and by the Spec-IP position, which is [+HR]. This is the optimal match between abstract case and morphosyntac- tic case, which will prevail unless some higher-ranked constraint prevents it. t2 See Vilkuna (1989) for a thorough study of the grammar of Finnish word order. 332 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 2.1.2. Object case marking Direct objects in Finnish are of two types, which are respectively governed by aspectually bounded and unbounded verbal predicates. Traditionally they are called resultative and irresultative objects, but since resultativity is only one type of aspec- tual boundedness I prefer the more non-committal terms R-objects and 1-objects. The class of bounded predicates, which take R-objects, comprises all telic ('resul- tative') predicates, such as (18a), plus a subclass of atelic predicates, mainly verbs of perception, knowing, possession, and containment ('quasi-resultative predicates', as Itkonen (1974) calls them), of which a sample is given in (18b). (18) a. b. ostaa 'buy', ottaa 'take', pudottaa 'drop', suorittaa 'carry out', kadottaa, menettdd 'lose (possession)', hdvitd 'lose (game, fight)', 16ytdd 'find', hyv~iksyd 'accept', panna 'put', asettaa 'place', tappaa 'kill', antaa 'give', kaataa 'fell', mainita 'mention', siepata 'catch', omaksua 'appropriate, internalize', ripustaa 'hang', istuttaa 'plant'. tuntea 'know' ('conna~tre'), tietdd 'know' ('savoir'), ymmfirtdd 'under- stand' (but unbounded in the sense 'have an understanding of, have sympa- thy for'), my6ntiiii 'acknowledge", katsoa 'regard, consider' (as something) (unbounded in the sense 'look at'), oivaltaa 'realize', uskoa 'believe' (something), ndhdd 'see', kuulla 'hear', huomata, havaita, keksid 'notice', omistaa 'own', sisdltdd 'contain', kdsittiid 'comprehend, comprise', muis- taa 'remember, recall' (unbounded in the sense 'think of, commemorate'). It is assumed that these two verb classes can be unified in terms of a semantic cate- gory of boundedness, though the characterization of boundedness remains elusive. Here are the descriptive generalizations about morphological case on objects. If they seem complex, the reader should take heart: examples and explanations will follow. I-objects are always partitive. R-objects are partitive only if at least one of the two conditions in (19) holds: (19) a. they are in the scope of sentence negation, or b. they have a quantitatively indeterminate denotation. Otherwise R-objects are case-marked in accord with (20): 13 (20) a. Personal pronouns are accusative. b. Singular NPs are genitive in the domain of a properly licensed subject. The domain includes nonfinite infinitive complements, and optionally particip- ial complements. For the definition of PROPERLY LICENSED see below. c. All other NPs (i. e. plural NPs, and singular NPs not in the domain of a properly licensed subject) are nominative. ~3 Here as elsewhere I assume the case system in (4). P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 333 For example, the R-object of the bounded predicate tuo- 'bring' in (21) is marked accusative if it is a pronoun (e, g. (21a) hdnet), genitive if it is a singular noun and there is a subject (21a) karhun), and nominative otherwise ((21a, c) karhut, karhu). The bare plural object karhuja 'bears' in (21b,d) is partitive by case (19b) (quantifi- cational partitivity). (21) a. Tuo-n h/ine-t / karhu-n / karhu-t. bringlSg he-Acc / bear-Gen / bear-PINom 'I'11 bring him/her / the (a) bear / the bears.' b. Tuo-n *h~in-t~i / *karhu-a / karhu-j-a, bringlSg you-Part / bear-Part / bear-PI-Part Tll bring him/her / the (a) bear / bears.' c. Tuo h~ine-t / karhu / karhu-t ! d. bring-Imp he-Acc / bear(Nom) / bear-P1Nom 'Bring him / the (a) bear / the bears! Tuo *han-t/i / *karhu-a / karhu-j-a! bring-Imp he-Part / bear-Part / bear-PI-Part 'Bring him / the (a) bear / bears !' In the present analysis, R-objects and I-objects are assigned different abstract case, respectively [-HR,-LR] and [-HR,+LR]. Given the above case features, the features of I-objects fall out directly from the assignment of abstract case; hence par- titive objects are the unmarked type of object for a normal transitive verb. R-objects must receive the feature [-HR,-LR], i. e. they are structurally more prominent. By assumption, this feature must be structurally assigned; the structure that assigns it can itself be semantically motivated, however (Section 2.1.4). 2.1.3. Nominal R-objects: Jahnsson' s rule Setting aside pronominal case-marking for now (we will get back to it later) let us concentrate on the case marking patterns of nominal R-objects. By (20b,c), singular nominal objects are genitive if they are governed by a verb that has a properly licensed subject, and otherwise nominative. By a PROPERLY LICENSED SUBJECT I mean one which bears morphological structural case, and which agrees with the verb if it can, which is to say if it is an external nominative subject. The data in (22) illustrate the main types of cases where there is no properly licensed subject and where nominal R-objects are consequently nominative. They are: bare infinitives (22a), first and second person imperatives (22b), and 'passives' (22c), including colloquial 1P1 morphological 'passives' (22d). (22) a. Nah-d/i Napoli ja kuol-la. see-Inf Naples(Nom) and die-llnf 'To see Naples and to die.' b. N~ie Napoli! see-Imp Naples(Nom) 'See Naples!' 334 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 c. N~h-tiin-k5 Matti / sinu-t? see-Pass-Past-Q Matti(Nom) / you-Acc 'Was Matti seen? Were you seen?' d. Me n~ih-tiin Matti / sinu-t. We(Nom) see-Pass-Past Matti(Nom) / you-Acc 'We saw Matti. We saw you.' (colloquial) The rest of this subsection is devoted to some of the hairier details connected with Jahnsson's Rule, which readers not particularly interested in Finnish may wish to skip. Genitive subjects of complements headed by nonfinite verbs also count as prop- erly licensed subjects, since they bear structural genitive case. These genitive sub- jects are in fact external subjects: if they were intemal subjects they would remain nominative (see (47) below). Thus, sinun in (23) is a properly licensed subject, and therefore the object karhun is assigned genitive case (rather than nominative case). (23) T~i-ss~i luul-laan sinu-n ampu-nee-n karhu-n. here suppose-Pass you-Gen shoot-PfP-Gen bear-Gen 'Here you are believed to have shot a bear.' The genitive case on the subject of nonfinite complements like (23) is a structural case. We can say that it is assigned structurally because it does not depend on the subject's theta-role or on the lexical identity of the verb, just on the verb's nonfinite morphology. These structural genitive subjects of infinitives contrast with the 'quirky' genitives assigned by adjectives, such as those in (24), which depend on the particular lexical item. For example, the adjective tdrked 'important' would assign allative case rather than genitive case. Unlike genitive subjects with structural case, genitive subjects with non-structural case (quirky genitive subjects) allow nomina- tive case on the object: (24) Sinu-n on helppo ampu-a tarn~i karhu. You-Gen be(3Sg) easy shoot-llnf this(Nom) bear(Nom) 'It is easy for you to shoot this bear.' As stressed by Timberlake (1974), it is not just the actual presence of an overt subject that is relevant for object marking. The object is case-marked even when there is no overt preverbal subject as long as there is subject-verb agreement and there could be a lexical subject in Spec-IP position (without other changes in the sen- tence). I assume that such 'potential subjects' are diagnostic of phonologically empty but syntactically visible subjects or subject positions. 'Pro-drop' is a simple case in point. First and second person pronouns in Finnish are optional (see (25a,b)); in the literary language their use implies some emphasis or contrast. Also, third person pro is silent in the generic or 'missing persons' construction illustrated in (25c) (Hakuli- nen and Karlsson, 1973), but overt generic expressions such as kuka tahansa 'any- one' or ihminen 'a person' could take its place without further change in form or P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 335 meaning. In these cases, the verb shows agreement in the appropriate number and person, and the covert subject is visible for syntactic processes such as control and anaphora. It also triggers genitive case marking of R-objects. (25) a. Me n~i-i-mme Napoli-n / sinu-t. we(Nom) see-Past-lPl Naples-Gen /you(Sg)-Acc 'We saw Naples / you.' (nominative subject and agreement) b. N~i-i-mme Napoli-n / sinu-t. See-Past-lPl Naples-Gen / you(Sg)-Acc 'We saw Naples / you.' (pro-drop, agreement) c. Sie-lt~i n~ike-e Napoli-n / sinu-t. there-Abl see-3Sg Naples-Gen /you(Sg)-Acc 'You (can) see Naples/you from there. ' (generic pro, agreement) These cases may be contrasted with (22d), where the subject, though it seems to be an external argument, does not agree with the verb, hence is not properly licensed as defined here. 1/2P imperative sentences may have optional overt pronominal 'subjects', yet function consistently as subjectless sentences for purposes of the case marking of objects and measure phrases. There are indications that these pronouns are not properly licensed subjects in an agreement relation with the imperative verb. First, unlike pro, they can be replaced by full nouns, still keeping the 2nd person verb inflection, e. g. (26a). 14 This suggests that there is no true agreement relation here. Secondly, they are obligatorily postverbal, e. g. (26b,c), even in the 1P1 imperative use of the passive (see (26d)), where the pronoun precedes in the declarative, yet they cannot be internal subjects because they occur with all verbs including transi- tives. The contrast with 3P imperatives is instructive here (Carlson, 1978). As (26e) shows, while 3P imperatives also share this pattern, they in addition allow an agree- ing nominative subject in Spec-IP, and correspondingly they also trigger genitive case on the object. (26) a. Nah-k~ (te /poja-t) Napoli! Men-naan see-Imp-2Pl (you(P1Nom) /boy-PlNom) Naples(Nom) Go-Pass poj a-t Napoli-in ! boy-PINom Naples-mat 'You (guys) see Naples!' 'Let's go to Naples, guys.' b. N~ie (sina) Napoli! *Sinai n~ie see-Imp (you(Nom)) Naples(Nom) you(Nom) see-Imp '(You) go ahead and see Naples!' 'You see Naples!' Napoli ! Naples(Nom) 14 They have been considered a type of vocative (Toivainen, 1993), but if so they would have to be a very special kind of vocative because unlike ordinary vocatives they can be first person, and take the clitic -kin "also'. 336 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 c. Niih-kii~i-mme (me-kin) Napoli! *Me-kin see-Imp-3Pl (we(Nom) too) Naples(Nom) we(Nom) too Napoli l Naples(Nom) 'Let's (us too) see Naples!' d. Niih-daiin (me-kin) Napoli! *Me-kin see-Pass (we(Nom) too) Naples(Nom) we(Nom) too Napoli ! Naples(Nom) 'Let's (us too) see Naples!' e. Nah-k66t (he) Napoli-n! He see-imp-3pl (they(Nom)) Naples-Gen they(Nom) Napoli-n ! Naples-Gen 'Let them see Naples!' n~Lh-kiiii-mme see-Imp-3P1 n~ih-cl~n see-Pass n~h-k66t see-imp-3pl The upshot is that imperatives, though their syntax is puzzling in many ways, if any- thing confirm the validity of the generalization. This is important because impera- tives are apparently the core environment of nominative objects in the Balto-Finnish languages (Griinthal, 1941) and in some unrelated languages as well) 5 The case alternation between nominative and accusative singular nominal objects emerges from the interaction of a special constraint with the general constraints on case assignment. To formulate the special constraint, we define a PIVOT as the high- est direct argument that can be expressed (in the sense explained above): (27) DEF: X is a pivot iff a. X is [+ SC], and b. no realizable thematically higher argument is [+ SC] Jahnsson's Rule can then be stated as (28): (28) Jahnsson's Rule (JR): NP-0 must be a pivot. A general constraint, *[ctF], states that everything gets nominative case (this is equivalent to saying that nominative is the 'elsewhere' case of the language). It is dominated by the special constraint (28), which in effect precludes morphologically endingless arguments, i. e. nominative singulars, after 'real' subjects. Narrowing down the problem to the choice between genitive and nominative in nominal R- objects, we obtain the correct distribution by the ranking JR >> *[tzF]. The adverbial t5 In Hopi, "Nominative is the case of the subject, noun-object of an maperative transitive verb, voca- tive ..." "Objective is the case of the direct object of transitive verbs (except in imperative .... )" (Whorf, 1946: 168). And in Lardil, "in imperatives, the direct object lacks -intha if it is third person, although if first person it takes that case ..." (Klokeid, 1978). P. Kiparsky / Lmgua 111 (2001) 315-376 337 cases work the same way, if we continue to suppose as before that they bear struc- tural case even though they have no theta-role (see items 5 and 6 in (29)). Here, then, is what we have so far. The complete tableaux will be supplied later. (29) Jahnsson's rule ] ... ([+ HR,-LR]) [-HR,-LR]: 'bring the bear!' la. tuo karhu-n [+ HR] (Gen.) lb. ~r tuo karhu-0 [ ] (Nom.) ([+ HR,-LR]) [-HR,-LR]: 'bring the bears!' 2a. tuo karhu-n [+ HR] (Gen.) 2b. ~r tuo karhu-t [ ] (Nom.) ([+ HR,-LR]) [-HR,-LR]: 'I'11 bring the bear' 3a. ~ tuon karhu-n [+ HR] (Gen.) 3b. tuon karhu-0 [ ] (Nom.) I JR I* F I-- * i!5 ........ ([+ HR,-LR]) [-HR,-LR]: 'I'11 bring the bears' 4a. tuon karhu-n [+ HR] (Gen.) * . ~ ~,~,:~<.. 4b. ~ tuon karhu-t [ ] (Nom.) ([+ HR,-LR]) [-HR,-LR]: 'wait a year!' 5b. odota vuode-n [+ HR] (Gen.) * [ . ;._ 5c. ~ odota vuosi-0 [ ] (Nom.) ~-? :~(~:~ [+ HR,-LR] [-HR,-LR]" 'I waited a year' 6a. ~ odotin vuode-n [+ HR] (Gen.) 6b. odotin vuosi-0 [ ] (Nora.) Weather verbs such as sataa 'it is raining' are another potentially troublesome case for Jahnsson's Rule. They routinely have a partitive object, e. g. sataa vettii 'it is raining', sataa lunta 'it is snowing', sataa rakeita 'hail is falling', literally some- thing like 'it precipitates water (snow, hail)' (quantitative partitivity). But the object is sometimes quantitatively determinate, and then it turns out to be genitive, not nominative as would be expected for subjectless verbs: (30) Joulu-ksi sato-i pysy-v~i-n lume-n. Christmas-Transl fall-Past(3Sg) stay-Prt-Gen snow-Gen 'For Christmas, there fell a permanent (amount of) snow.' A closer look suggests that weather verbs do have a licensed thematic subject posi- tion, as the genitive case-marking on the object implies. For all of them can have overt lexical subjects, as in (3 lb,c): 16 16 Examples (30) and (31) are from the Nykysuomen Sanakirja dictionary. 338 P. Ktparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 (31) a. Pilvi sata-a vet-t~i. cloud(-Nom) rain-3Sg water-Part 'The cloud is raining (water).' (e.g. as opposed to snowing) b. Taivas o-n sata-nut kaike-n lume-nsa. sky(-Nom) be-3Sg rain-PfP all-Gen snow(Gen)-3Sg 'The sky has precipitated all its snow.' While infrequent, these constructions with overt subjects are perfectly grammatical. With other weather verbs they occur more frequently, e.g. (aurinko) paistaa 'it (the sun) is shining', (lumi) pyryiiii 'there is a blizzard'. Moreover, many ordinary verbs can function as weather verbs, e. g. tulee lunta (tulee 'comes'), heittaii lunta (heittiiii 'throws'), and this whole group seem to belong to a larger class of optionally imper- sonal verbs, which include verbs like vilistii 'teem', tykyttiiii 'throb'. The upshot of all this are the following two conclusions: (32) a. The subject position in Finnish is morphosyntactically eliminated only as a result of special morphology (passives and imperatives). b. Pivots for purposes of Jahnsson's Rule are potential (empty but realizable) external subjects, as well as actually realized subjects. They include the subjects of weather verbs, and generic 3rd person subjects. Now we come to what is probably the most interesting aspect of Jahnsson's Rule: the case marking of noun objects shows an unbounded long-distance dependency. If the matrix clause has a pivot, then a singular noun object of an infinitive comple- ment is genitive whether the infinitive has a subject or not. This genitive object marking extends obligatorily down through a chain of such infinitive complements. In other words, nominative objects must be pivots within their entire finite clause. The same long-distance effect shows up in participial complements, but there it is optional: a subjectless participial complement may have a genitive singular noun object even if there is no subject in any higher clause) 7 But if genitive case is assigned to the object of a participial complement, the objects in all participial and infinitive complements below it must be genitive as well. Thus, (33a) has a down- stairs genitive object and measure phrase respectively, because the subordinate clause itself has a properly licensed subject (genitive sinun), and the (33b,c) have a downstairs genitive object because the main clause has a properly licensed subject (the pro subject 'we'). (33) a. Luul-laan sinu-n suoritta-nee-n korvaukse-n. suppose-Pass you-Gen make-PfP-Gen compensation-Gen 'You are believed to have paid compensation.' t7 Participial complement clauses are optional islands with respect to negational partitivity and extrac- tion as well. P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 339 b. Sii-t~i luule-mme suorite-tu-n korvaukse-n. it-Part suppose-lP1 perform-PPP-Gen compensation-Gen 'We believe compensation to have been paid for it.' c. Halus-i-mme yritta-a juos-ta kilometri-n kahde-ssa minuuti-ssa. want-Past-lSg try-Inf run-Inf kilometer-Gen two-Iness minute-Iness 'We wanted to try to run a kilometer in two minutes.' In contrast, the sentences in (34) have nominative objects and measure phrases in the lowest clause because none of their verbs has a thematic subject.18 (34) a. Sii-ta luul-laan suorite-tu-n korvaus. it-Part suppose-Pass perform-PPP-Gen compensation(Nom) 'Compensation is believed to have been paid for it.' b. Sii-t/i luul-laan voi-ta-va-n suoritta-a korvaus. it-Part suppose-Pass can-Pass-Part-Gen perform-Inf compensation(Nom) 'Compensation is believed to be able to be paid for it.' c. Halut-tiin want-PastPass kilometri kahde-ssa minuuti-ssa. yritt~i4i try-Inf juos-ta run-Inf kilometer(Nom) two-Iness minute-Iness 'People we wanted to try to run a kilometer in two minutes.' d. Ilmen-i vaite-ty-n luul-lu-n become-apparent-Past(3Sg) allege-PassPart-Gen think-PassPart-Gen voi-ta-va-n suoritta-a korvaus. can-Pass-Inf-Gen perform-Inf compensation(Nom) 'It became apparent that it had been claimed to have been thought that com- pensation could be paid.' These long-distance effects follow if we assume that the case marking constraints hold within the domain of a finite clause. 2.1.4. Partitive objects The second type of direct object, the 1-object, occurs with predicates which denote an activity of indeterminate extent, such as 'seek' in (35). An I-object, whether nom- inal or pronominal, is partitive regardless of its denotation. Here partitive case marks the aspectual unboundedness of the VP. (35) a. Etsi-n *sinu-t / *karhu-n / *karhu-t. seek-lSg you-Acc / bear-Gen / bear-PINom 'I'm looking for you / the (a) bear / the bears.' b. Etsi-n sinu-a / karhu-a / / karhu-j-a. seek-lSg you-Part / bear-Part bear-P1-Part 'I'm looking for you / the (a) bear / (the) bears.' t8 While these sentences are all grammatically correct, the longer ones are stylistically clumsy; I have made them up to dramatize the unbounded character of the phenomenon. 340 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 A sampling of such unbounded predicates is given in (36). ~9 (36) halveksia 'despise', ihailla 'admire', ikdv6idd 'yearn for', harrastaa 'be inter- ested in (as a hobby)', huvittaa 'amuse', ikdvystyttdd 'bore', inhota 'feel revul- sion towards', kadehtia 'envy', karttaa 'avoid', kehua, ylistiid 'praise', kiin- nostaa 'interest', kiittiid 'thank', kunnioittaa 'honor', moittia 'blame, reprimand', onnitella 'congratulate', peldtii 'fear', rakastaa 'love', sietdd 'tol- erate', siunata 'bless', toivoa 'hope for', valittaa 'complain about', vihata 'hate', koettaa, yrittdii 'try', pyytdd 'ask for', merkitd, tarkoittaa 'mean', ajatella, pohtia 'think about', harkita 'consider', matkia 'imitate', paeta 'flee', kysyii 'ask for', heiluttaa 'swing back and forth', ravistaa 'shake', keinuttaa 'rock', koskettaa 'touch'. A large number of verbs are aspectually ambivalent, allowing both a bounded read- ing and an unbounded reading, with concomitant syntactic alternation between R- object and I-object. For example, ampua 'shoot' is both unbounded (' shoot at', with an 1-object) and bounded ('shoot at and hit', with an R-object). Previous studies have tied the distinction between partitive and 'accusative' objects directly to the aspectual properties of the verb (or of some verbal projection). Vainikka (1993: 142) assumes that all instances of accusative case are triggered by a feature [+ COMPLETED] on the governing verb, and that partitive cases is assigned when this feature is not present. A solution along these lines would be easy to imple- ment in the present framework as well. However, as stated it constitutes a purely descriptive solution which provides no principled reason why accusative and parti- tive are distributed in this way. The feature [COMPLETED] is really a placeholder for the actual semantic property responsible for accusative case. Nelson (1998: 148ff.) proposes that partitive case is associated with assignment of a non-aspectual theta-role (Omod), while accusative case is associated with assign- ment of aspectual theta-roles, both by V at D-structure. I shall explore a solution along these lines, which derives the thematic difference from Semantic Form. The proposal is that R-objects occur when the predicate denotes a complex event. In par- ticular, R-objects occur when the predicate has an extra resultative theta-role, which may be overtly expressed as a resultative predicate. Two basic generalizations add a measure of support for this interpretation of the syntactic distinction between R- objects and I-objects: bounded verbal predicates only have R-objects, and verbs with overt resultatives only have R-objects (i. e. they are not partitive except when quan- tification and negation require it). (37) a. Ammu-i-n karhu-n / karhu-a. shoot-Pst-lSg bear-Gen / bear-Part 'I shot the (a) bear / I shot at the (a) bear.' 19 When these verbs are used with an explicit resultative predicate, they do get a resultative object; below we will find out why. P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 341 (38) a. b. Ammu-i-n karhu-n / (* karhu-a) kuoliaa-ksi. shoot-Pst-lSg bear-Gen /bear-Part dead-Transl 'I shot the (a) bear dead.' (OK: 'I was in the process of shooting the (a) bear dead.') Heit-i-n ikkuna-a rock-Adess throw-Past-lSg window-Part kive-ll~i. 'I threw the (a) rock at the (a) window.' b. Heit-i-n ikkuna-n kive-ll~i rikki. throw-Past-lSg window-Gen rock-Adess broken 'I broke the (a) window by throwing the (a) rock at it.' c. Heit-i-n kive-n ikkuna-an. throw-Past-lSg rick-Gen window-Ill 'I threw the (a) rock into the (a) window.' Transfer predicates and privative predicates also take R-objects (rather than I- objects) as their one direct object argument. (39) a. L~i~ik~iri kiels-i h~ine-lt~i kahvinjuonni-n. doctor(Nom) forbid-Past(3Sg) he-Abl coffee-dfinking-Gen 'The (a) doctor forbade him the drinking of coffee.' b. L~iak~i lupas-i h~ine-lle resepti-n. doctor(Nom) promise-Past(3Sg) he-All prescription-Gen 'The (a) doctor promised him the (a) prescription.' The hypothesis that R-objects are associated with an implicit result role is not new. Finnish grammarians have speculated that whenever the object has (in their terms) accusative case, there is a resultative associated with it, even if it is not overtly expressed (Siro, 1974). According to this analysis, 'shoot the bear- Accusative' is really 'shoot the bear dead'. Furthermore, Toivainen (1993) has sug- gested that R-objects are always realized in a structurally higher object position than the partitive objects of unbounded verbal predicates. His evidence is that partitive objects of unbounded verbal predicates but not resultative objects can be preceded by accusative measure adverbsfl ° This idea can be integrated into our theory of abstract Case by making use of Pifion's proposal that accomplishment predicates have a result theta-role (Pifion, 1995). If result role is be the lowest role, with the abstract Case feature [+LR], its presence entails that the object is [-LR]. R-objects and I-objects then have different abstract cases; specifically, R-objects are [-HR,-LR], and I-objects are [-HR, +LR]. -~0 Of course, these data might have a similar semantic explanation as the similar English contrast between He ate apples the whole time and #He ate the apples the whole time. 342 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 (40) (41) Abstr. Case Morph. Case [ IP VP NP I V NP I I I I Minii anmluini e, karhua +HR -HR ] [+LR ] IP Abstr. Case Morph. Case NP I V NP Res I I I I I Minii ammuin, e, karhun kuoliaaksi E;L" R] [ ] [-LR] - The 'quasi-resultative' verbs in (18b) which take accusative objects, such as 'see', 'know', 'remember', 'own', 'contain', 'hold' are atelic, therefore have no result role. However, they arguably also have a complex decomposition into an event plus a result state, where the event is an achievement rather than an accomplishment. Like resultative predicates (accomplishments), such stative predicates denote a complex eventuality, consisting of a state and a (potential) initiating event. But unlike resul- tative predicates their main predication is over the result state, leaving the initiating event implicit. Such 'backwards resultatives', or initiative predicates as we might call them, could be assimilated to the above analysis by treating the source event as the [+ LR] theta-role, analogous to the Resultative role in (41). 21 As stated in (19), R-objects are partitive when the object is in the scope of nega- tion or has quantitatively indeterminate reference. For efforts to unify the quantifica- tional partitivity of R-objects with the aspectual partitivity of I-objects on semantic grounds see Hein~n/iki (1984), Kiparsky (1998), and the references cited there. In ~-t Tellingly, they are just the kinds of transitive verbs whose equivalents tend form their present tenses with perfect morphology in a variety of languages: English has got 'has', Sanskrit veda, ciketa, Class. Greek oide, egnfke 'knows' (literally 'has seen, has come to know'), Greek memndtai, Latin rnemimt 'remembers' (lit. 'has recalled'), Greek kekt~tai, Sanskrit anaie 'possesses' (lit. 'has acquired'), Sanskrit dadhdra 'holds' (lit. 'has grasped'), Sanskrit pari-babhava, vivyaca 'contains' (lit. 'has encompassed'). P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 343 line with the syntactic account pursued here, let us suppose that quantitative parti- tivity is assigned by a null quantifier analogous to overt quantifiers like paljon 'much, many'. The partitive as R-object is then assigned internally to the QP, which itself receives structural case from the governing verb. (42) VP L[-HR] J L o j , Lt+ LR]J This fits well with the partitive's status as the unmarked case of objects, both seman- tically (Hein~nAki, 1984) and syntactically (Vainikka, 1993: 142ff.). The key semantic point is that a sentence like 'Matti shot the bear' (genitive) entails that the bear was hit, while 'Matti shot at the bear' (partitive) does not entail that it was not hit, though it implicates it (or at least that if the bear was hit, it did not die, as Satu Manninen points out to me) by the Gricean maxim 'be informative'. The unmarked status of aspectual unboundedness follows from the assumption that aspectual bound-edness derives from the presence of an extra resultative theta-role. Thus (43) conforms to the generalization that overt resultatives require R-objects. It is a quantificational partitive, with the structure of (42), and thereby an R-object with the abstract case [-HR] like those in (37). (43) a. Ammu-i-n karhu-j-a kuoliaa-ksi. shoot-Pst-lSg bear-P1-Part dead-Transl 'I shot bears dead.' b. Siirs-i-mme kirjo-j-a yliihylly-lle. move-Past-lP1 book-PI-Part top-shelf-All 'We moved books onto the top shelf.' The partitive of negation can be assumed to be likewise governed by the negative element, as in (44). 22 2., A more interesting solution would be that negation selects a null quantifier like that in (42), which itself assigns partitive case to its complement, but it is not clear how ordinary singular count objects could be dealt with then. 344 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 (44) IP Neg VP [+~RI The three triggers of partitivity - negation, quantification, and unmarked aspect - can co-occur, which leads to multiple ambiguities (Itkonen, 1974: 185). In (45) they combine in different ways to yield from two to six different readings of the same sentence. The verb silittdd, literally 'to smooth', can mean 'stroke, pet' (e.g. an animal), in which case it is aspectually unbounded and its object NP always has par- titive case regardless of its denotation. It can also mean 'iron' (clothes), in which case it can be either aspectually unbounded ('to be ironing', 'to iron away at') or aspectually bounded ('to iron smooth'), and then the case marking of its object depends on its denotation (quantificational partitivity). With a plurale tantum denot- ing a pair or collection, such as housut 'pants' we get an extra ambiguity because the aspectual partitive of a single pair or collection (the inherent plural) and of a plural- ity of pairs or collections have the same form. 23 Under negation, as always, the object is partitive regardless of aspectuality or quantification. (45) a. Silitin karhuja: (1) 'I stroked the bears' (aspectual partitivity), or (2) 'I stroked (some) bears' (both aspectual partitivity and quantificational parti- tivity). b. Silitin paitoja: (1) 'I was ironing ('ironed away at') the shirts' (aspectual partitivity), or (2) 'I ironed (some) shirts' (quantificational partitivity), or (3) 'I was ironing (some) shirts' (both). c. Silitin housuja: (1) 'I was ironing a/the (pair of) pants', (2) 'I was ironing the pants (a fixed number)' (aspectual partitivity), (3) 'I ironed (some) pants' (quantificational partitivity), (4) 'I was ironing (some) pants' (both). d. En silitt?inyt housuja: (1) 'I wasn't ironing a/the (pair of) pants', (2) 'I wasn't ironing the pants (fixed number)" (aspectual partitivity), (3) "I didn't iron (any) pants' (quantificational partitivity), (4) 'I wasn't ironing (any) pants' (both), (5) 'I didn't iron a/the (pair of) pants', (6) 'I didn't iron the pants (fixed number)' (negation-triggered partitivity). The outcome so far is that external subjects have the abstract case [+HR], and that R-objects and I-objects are respectively [-HR,-LR] and [-HR,+LR]. These features directly represent the grammatical relations: subjects are [+ HR] at all levels and objects are [-HR] at all levels. R-objects and I-objects are further differentiated by the feature [LR]. 23 See Ojeda (1997) for discussion of the semantics of such inherent plurals. P. Kzparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 345 We now turn to a different class of sentences, with internal arguments that in pre- vious work have been argued to be objects, and argue that they are in fact subjects, as the proposed case theory predicts. 2.2. Existential sentences 2.2.1. Internal subjects The sole direct argument of an intransitive predicate can be realized either as an extemal argument (46a), or as an internal argument (46b,c). (Keep in mind that I am using these terms in reference to the syntactic licensing position, not to a putative D- structure position.) As an extemal subject, it is a vanilla subject with the case and word order properties discussed in the preceding section, viz. nominative case and agreement if the verb is finite, and genitive case otherwise. 24 Comparison with the (b) and (c) sentences shows that internal arguments differ in these respects. They have no agreement and can take the quantificational partitive (as well as overt QPs headed by quantifiers like paljon). (46) a. Uutise-t jatku-vat. news-P1Nom continue-3Pl 'The news will continue.' b. Nyt tule-e uutise-t. Now come-3Sg news-PINom 'Now there comes the news.' c. Nyt tule-e uutis-i-a. Now come-3Sg news-P1-Part 'Now there comes news (items of news).' Intransitive sentences with internal arguments are recognized by Finnish gram- marians as a separate sentence type called existential sentences. They were explored in a remarkable series of articles by Ikola (1954, 1955, 1961, 1974), with further contributions by Sadeniemi (1955), Hakulinen (1968), Siro (1974), Karlsson (1978), Itkonen (1975a,b, 1976a,b, 1980). I cannot hope to do justice to all the insights on existential sentences that these works contain, and will only address the still open question of the status of their subject, which I think my approach brings closer to a resolution. The internal arguments of existential sentences, which I will argue are internal subjects, resemble R-objects of subjectless sentences in some respects and have actu- ally been equated with R-objects by several writers (Wiik, 1974; Karlsson, 1982; Vilkuna, 1989: 156). They are also akin to internal subjects of a second major type of clause, the possessive construction, which however has a slightly different mix of properties (see Section 2.3). The challenge now is to make theoretical sense of the apparently intermediate grammatical status of these internal arguments. 2~ In addition, these sentences allow the word orders with topicalization and focusing illustrated in (17). 346 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 Internal subjects do not agree with a finite verb. Instead, the finite verb receives third person singular default agreement. Internal subjects retain nominative case when the verb is nonfinite, unlike external arguments, which must become genitive. This is shown in (47), where tulla 'come' in (47a) is a verb that allows existential sentences, while jatkua 'continue' is notfl 5 (47) a. Nyt Now 'Now there should come the news / some news.' b. (*) Nyt pit~i-isi jatku-a uutise-t Now must-Cond-(3Sg) continue-llnf news-PI-Part 'Now there should continue the news / some news.' c. Uutis-t-en pita-isi jatku-a nyt. news-P1Gen must-Cond-(3Sg) continue-llnf now 'The news should continue now.' (External subject.) pit~i-isi tul-la uutise-t / uutis-i-a. must-Cond-(3Sg) come-llnf news-P1Nom /news-P1Part / uutis-i-a. The data in (47) can help pinpoint the location of internal subjects in the VP. The two possibilities are the Specifier of VP (Vainikka, 1993: 158; Kiparsky, 199826) and the complement of V, i. e. the direct object position (Wiik, 1974; Nelson, 1998). These examples suggest that it is the latter. In (47c), the external subject raises to the Spec-IP position. In (47a), the subject remains internal, yielding that position to the temporal adverb, and itself then follows the infinitive verb of which it is the 'sub- ject'. If that order reflects the base position (and I do not know why it would not), then the internal subject must be syntactically in the complement position. A class of quantifiers, such as paljon 'much, many' in (49), which govem the par- titive, may not head external arguments, hence (49c) is ungrammatical (Karttunen, 1975). We can say that these quantifiers (like the measure phrases discussed earlier) inherently bear abstract accusative case, which is to say the features [-HR,-LR], and therefore the phrases they head cannot be either external subjects or unbounded (par- titive) objects. (48) a. Nyt tule-e paljon uutis-i-a. Now come-3Sg much news-P1-Part 'A lot of news is coming now.' b. Uutis-i-a tule-e paljon. news-P1-Part come(-3Sg) much 'A lot of news is coming.' c. *Paljon uutis-i-a jatku-vat much news-PI-Part continue-3P1 'A lot of news will continue.' / jatku-u. / continue-3Sg 25 The negated sentence in (47b) is acceptable with contrastive focus on uutiset, like (50b) below. See Vilkuna (1989: 159). ~_6 Guilfoyle et al. (1992) make a similar proposal for Malayo-Polynesian. P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 347 By associating the same case feature with the null quantifier in (42), we directly account for the fact that quantitative partitives in general cannot be external sub- jects: 27 (49) *Uutis-i-a jatku-vat / jatku-u. news-P1-Part continue-3Pl / continue-3Sg 'News will continue.' 2.2.2. Scope and definiteness In declarative main clauses the preverbal Spec-IP position must normally be filled somehow. 28 In existential sentences it is preferentially filled by an adverb of place or time, or by an experiencer-type oblique argument, but failing that, internal subjects themselves, or their bare nominal head, get fronted there. A fronted internal subject is still incapable of agreement, remains semantically in the scope of negation, and does not acquire any characteristics of external subjects. Internal subjects are partitive (as in (50c)) under the conditions of (19), that is, if they are in the scope of sentence negation, or if they have a quantitatively indeter- minate denotation. External subjects remain outside the scope of sentence negation, and retain nominative case under negation (see (50a)). 29 (50) a. Uutise-t (* uutis-i-a) ei-v~it jatku. news-P1Nom (* news-PI-Part) not-3P1 continue 'The news / news will not continue.' b. (*) Nyt ei tule uutise-t. now not(-3Sg) come news-PINom 'Now there does not come the news. c. Nyt ei tule uutis-i-a. now not(-3Sg) come news-P1-Part 'Now there does not come any news.' The relation to semantic scope is shown by the contrast between (5 la), which pre- supposes that I have brothers and sisters living somewhere and asserts that they do not live in Turku, and (5 lb), which simply means that no brothers or sisters of mine live in Turku - I might not have any brothers and sisters. (51) a. Sisarukse-ni ei-v~it asu Turu-ssa. sibling(-PINom)-lSgP not-3Pl live T.-iness 'My brothers and sisters don't live in Turku.' V x (x is a sibling of mine D --1 (x lives in T.)) 27 The marginal 'transitive existential sentences' discussed in Hakulinen and Karlsson (1979: 168) Nikanne (1990: 124ff.) might be analyzed as having a subject with a nominative version of this null quantifier. 28 V-initial declaratives such as Tulee paljon uutisia do occur, with a special discourse function; see Vilkuna (1989) for discussion of this and other word order variations. 29 (50b) is acceptable with contrastive focus on uutiset, like (47b). See fn. 25. 348 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 b. Sisaruks-i-a-ni ei asu Turu-ssa. sibling-P1-Part-lSgP not-3Sg live T.-iness 'No brothers or sisters of mine live in Turku.' ~3x (x a sibling of mine A x lives in T.) A core class of existential verbs (approximately the traditional unaccusatives, it seems) admits even singular definite internal subjects with partitive case under nega- tion (as first noted by Ikola, 1955: 320). (52) a. Anna ei ena~i tul-lut. Anna(Nom) not-3Sg any more come-PfP 'Anna did not come any more' [She stayed away.] (External subject) b. Ei tul-lut en~ Anna-a. Not-3Sg come-PfP any more Anna-Part 'Anna did not come any more' [Perhaps she died.] (Internal subject) Internal subjects show no 'definiteness effect', at least in any obvious sense. They can be either indefinite, as in (53b), or defmite, as in (52b) and (46b). If nominative, they must however be quantitatively determinate. On the other hand, the aspectual character of the predicate never induces partitive case marking on internal subjects, any more than on extemal ones. Therefore, our constraint system must have the effect of excluding the correspondence between abstract [+ HR] case and morphosyntactic [-HR] case. As an example of the contrast of quantitative indeterminacy in internal subjects (clause (19b)) consider the semantic difference between the nominative internal sub- ject in (46b) and the partitive internal subject in (46c). While (46b) refers to a deter- minate quantity of news, as would be contained in a scheduled news broadcast, (46c) suggests an indeterminate number of news items, such as a series of special bul- letins. Clearer examples of the same contrast are furnished by non-homogeneous plurals which refer to a complete set of a particular size, such as kaksoset 'twins' (like housut 'pants' in (45)). The nominative refers to a single such set and the par- titive refers to an indeterminate number of such sets. 3° (53) a. Kaksose-t synty-i-v~it. twin-P1Nom be-bom-Past-3Pl 'The twins were born.' b. (Liisa-lle) synty-i kaksose-t. '(L.-Allat) be-born-Past-3Sg twin-PINom 'Twins [i. e. a pair of twins] were born (to Liisa).' 30 Other such pluralia tantum and collectives that work the same way are housut 'pants', sukset 'skis', sakset 'scissors', rattaat 'cart', ryypyt 'drink', lehdet 'leaves' (foliage), sormet "f'mgers', kasvot 'face', kiiytti~ohje et 'instructions', tikapuut 'ladder'. P. Klparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 349 c. (Liisa-lle) synty-i kaksos-i-a. '(L.-Allat) be-born-Past-3Sg twin-P1-Part 'Twins [one or more pairs] were born (to Liisa).' 2.2.3. How internal subjects differ from objects, and why If we take seriously the idea that an argument's abstract case derives from the structural prominence of its theta-role in Semantic Form, then the internal subjects of existential sentences should have the highest lexical them-role of their clause, hence the abstract case feature [+ HR]. Their VP-intemal position on the other hand gives them the positional case feature [-HR]. That is, internal subjects are subjects in object position. This means that they are not objects; in particular, it is not correct to equate them syntactically with R-objects of subjectless verbs (Wiik, 1974). (In the examples I indicate the values for the abstract case feature [HR].) (54) I Nyt Abstr. Case Morph. Case Pos. Case [+ HR] IP PP I V NP J I I tulee, e, uutiset +LRJ [+HR] [-HR] In what follows I give six arguments to show that existential subjects are not objects. In every case, the syntactic properties of internal subjects will be seen to fol- low from the mismatch between the abstract case feature [+ HR] and the positional case feature [-HR]. First, the nominal object of the infinitive complement of an existential sentence is genitive, as in (55a), just like that of a sentence with an external subject (55b), whereas the nominal object of the infinitive complement of a subjectless verb (such as a passive or an imperative) is nominative (55c). In fact, as we saw in Section 2.1.2, case-marking of nominal objects propagates arbitrarily far down in a chain of nested infinitives. In contrast, there is no such long-distance effect in existential sentences. The analysis of Jahnsson's rule given in (28) extends readily to the long-distance cases, and predicts the difference between R-objects of subjectless sentences and internal subjects, in particular the genitive of (55a) versus the nominative of (55c). (55) a. Sinne tul-i sukellusvene[+ HR] upotta-ma-an laiva-n[-HR]. there come-Past(3Sg) submarine(Nom) sink-Inf-Ill ship-Gen 'A submarine came there to sink the ship.' 350 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 b. He[+ HR] 1/ihetti-v/it they(Nom) send-Past-3P1 submarine-Gen laiva-n[-HR]. ship-Gen 'They sent a submarine to sink the ship.' c. ~[+ HR] 1/ihetta-k~i/i sukellusvene[-HR] send-2Pllmper submarine(Nom) 'Send a submarine to sink the ship.' sukellusvenee-n[-HR] upotta-ma-an sink-Inf-Ill upotta-ma-an laiva[-HR]. sink-In f-Ill ship(Nom) A second way in which the case-marking of the internal subject of existential sen- tences differs from the case-marking of the R-object of subjectless sentences relates to the adverbs mentioned in (10), from which Maling (1993) drew support for her case-in-tiers analysis. They may be nominative in subjectless sentences such as pas- sives or imperatives (see (56a)), but they remain genitive in existential sentences (see (56b)). (56) a. Siel-l~i asut-tiin koko vuosi. there-Adess live-PastPass whole-(Nom) year-(Nom) 'People/we lived there all year.' b. Siel-l/i kulk-i laivo-j-a koko vuode-n. there-Adess go-Past(3Sg) ship-Part-Pl all year-Gen 'Ships plied there all year.' The nominative case marking is (56a) is licit by (28) because the adverbial is a pivot by (27), and genitive is enforced in (56b), as in (29). 31 What (55) and (56) both show is that the nominative case-marking of internal sub- jects is strictly local, and restricted to the subject itself, while the nominative case- marking of objects of subjectless sentences extends to VP adverbials within the clause, and to adverbials and objects in an unbounded domain of nonfinite comple- ment clauses. A third important difference between internal subjects and R-objects is that aspec- tually un-bounded predicates do not partitivize internal subjects (see (57b)). Like external subjects, they are simply immune from aspectual partitivity (Vilkuna, 1989: 159). 32 (57) a. Matti ol-i juuri osta-ma-ssa auto-a. Matti be-Past(3Sg) just buy-Inf-Iness car-Part 'Matti was just (in the process of) buying a car.' 3~ There are several types of such adverbs, some of them on the way to becoming frozen in nominative or genitive form. Adverbs like vtelii kerran "one more time', kolmannen kerran 'a third time' discussed by Maling, while they do show the case altemation, are not ideal to test the conditions of the altemation because they occur readily in the genitive even in sentences with subjectless verbs. 32 Negation and quantitative indeterminacy do trigger partitive case marking on internal subjects; see (51); this follows from the account proposed in Section 2.1.4. P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 351 b. *Piha-lle ol-i juuri aja-ma-ssa auto-a. Courtyard be-Past(3Sg) just drive-Inf-Iness car-Part 'A car was just (in the process) of driving into the courtyard.' Aspectual partitivity in internal subjects will be excluded by the same constraints that exclude aspectual partitivity in external subjects. Internal arguments of 'pas- sives', on the other hand, have the abstract case feature [-HR], i. e. they are true objects, and display the full aspectual boundedness contrast of objects (viz. [+LR]). Fourth, personal pronouns cannot be internal subjects of existential predicates, whereas they can of course be R-objects. Death's famous reminder Et in Arcadia ego translates as (58b) rather than as (58a) (which remains ungrammatical with any word order). (58) a. *Arkadia-ssa-kin on minu-t / min~i. Arcadia-Iness-too be(3Sg) /me-Acc I(Nom) 'Even in Arcadia there is me.' b. Min/i ole-n Arkadia-ssa-kin. I(Nom) be-lSg Arcadia-hess-too 'I am even in Arcadia.' This follows from the general constraints on pronominal case marking discussed in Section 3 below. A fifth point of difference, noted by Vilkuna (1989), is that internal subjects can- not be subjects of passive participles: (59) a. Pidate-tty henkil6 arrest-PfP(Nom) person(Nom) 'The/a arrested person.' b. *Istu-ttu henkil6 sit-PfP(Nom) person(Nom) 'The/a sat person.' The reason is that passive participles cannot be impersonal and thus cannot apply to any intransitive verbs. Sixth, internal subjects can behave as subjects with respect to disjoint reference and anaphoric coreference constraints. (60a,b) show that a pronoun must be disjoint from the extemal subject of its clause, and (60c,d) show that a possessive suffix must be coreferential with the subject of its clause 33 33 There are some well-known systematic exceptions, notably verbs with an implied causative mean- ing, such as viedii 'bring'. 352 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 (60) a. Upot-i-mme laiva-n se-n suoritta-e-ssa saattopalvelus-ta. sink-Past-lPl ship-Gen it-Gen perform-2Ptc-Iness escort-service-Part 'We sank the ship while it was performing escort duty.' b. *Laiva uppos-i se-n suoritta-e-ssa saattopalvelus-ta. ship(Nom) sink-Past(3Sg) it-Gen perform-2Ptc-Iness escort-service-Part 'The ship sank while it was performing escort duty.' c. *Upot-i-mme laiva-n suoritta-e-ssa-an saattopalvelus-ta. sink-Past-lP1 ship-Gen perform-2Ptc-Iness-3P escort-service-Part 'We sank the ship while (it was) performing escort duty.' d. Laiva uppos-i suoritta-e-ssa-an saattopalvelus-ta. ship(Nom) sink-Past(3Sg) perform-2Ptc-Iness-3P escort-service-Part 'The ship sank while performing escort duty.' The objects of imperatives and bare infinitives behave just like objects of any other transitive verbs in that they are not possible antecedents for anaphora. (61) a. Upotta-kaa laiva se-n suoritta-e-ssa saattopalvelus-ta. sink-Imper2P1 ship(Nom) it-Gen perform-2Ptc-Iness escort-service-Part 'Sink the ship while it is performing escort duty.' b. *Upotta-kaa laiva suoritta-e-ssa-an saattopalvelus-ta. sink-Imper2P1 ship(Nom) perform-2Ptc-Iness-3P escort-service-Part 'Sink the ship while [it is] performing escort duty.' In contrast, judgments for internal subjects such as those in (62) are rather vari- able across speakers; (62a) is in any case worse than (61a), and (62b) is better than (61b), which everyone rejects as absolutely ungrammatical. (62) a. ?Sie-ll~i uppos-i paljon laivo-j-a nii-den there-Adess sink-Past(3Sg) many ship-P1-Part they-PIGen perform-2Ptc-Iness suoritta-e-ssa saattopalvelus-ta, escort-service-Part 'Many ships sank there while they were performing escort duty.' b. ?Sie-ll~i uppos-i paljon laivo-j-a suoritta-e-ssa-an there-Adess sink-Past(3Sg) many ship-P1-Part perform-2Ptc-Iness-3P saattopalvelus-ta. escort-service-Part 'Many ships sank there while performing escort duty.' The variability in anaphora and disjoint reference seen in (62) is part of a more general pattern. The generalization is that the antecedent of an anaphor is the exter- nal subject if there is one. If there is no external subject, then the antecedent is optionally the logical subject, or, still optionally, the highest structurally licensed (direct) argument. An anaphor must have an antecedent in the same clause and a pro- noun may not have one. In existential sentences the logical subject and the highest licensed argument coincide; the pattern in (62) arises because this argument only optionally counts as an antecedent. P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 353 To restate the conclusion of this section: the sole argument of an existential sen- tence is not an object. It is a subject in object position, which is to say that it has the abstract case feature [+ HR] and the morphosyntactic case feature [-HR]. 2.3. The passive Finnish 'passives' are really impersonal sentences whose unexpressed logical sub- ject is a third person plural human pro. The implied 'agent' is not necessarily agen- tive, nor are impersonal passives restricted to unergative verbs. (63) a. H~ine-t tape-taan. he-Acc kill-Pass 'He will be killed.' (by someone, not by something) b. Sie-lla keUut-tiin. there-Adess float-PastPass 'One floated there.' (people, not e. g. boats, otters, or corpses) c. Sie-ll~i ol-tiin ~rtyne-i-ta. there-Adess be-Pass irritated-PI-Part 'People were irritated there.' (not e. g. bees) Note that the predicate adjective in (74c) is obligatorily plural, in agreement with the plurality of the unexpressed logical subject. With respect to case marking, objects of passive clauses work exactly like objects of subjectless actives (1/2 person imperatives and infinitives). Since they are [-HR], negation and aspect trigger partitive case on them. Passive agents are demoted (this is the defining feature of passive morphology). Therefore they are unlicensed, and do not trigger genitive marking on objects: (64) Karhu n~ih-tiin. bear(Nom) see-PastPass 'The bear was seen.' Siell~i n~ih-tiin karhu. There see-PastPass bear(Nom) 'A bear was seen there.' Passive objects are pivots, since they are [-HR] and the passive agent is unli- censed. Therefore objects in their nonfmite complement domain must appear in the nominative rather than in the genitive: (65) Sinne l~ihetet-tiin sukellusvene-i-t~i upotta-maan laiva. there send-PastPass submarine-P1-Part sink-Inf ship(Nom) 'Submarines were sent there to sink the ship.' Like other [-HR] arguments (but unlike internal subjects), objects of passives can be pronouns: (66) Minu-t niLh-tiin. I-Acc see-PastPass 'I was seen.' 354 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 With respect to construal properties such as anaphora and disjoint reference, how- ever, passive sentences differ from objects of subjectless sentences. Passive sen- tences vacillate about like existential sentences such as (62). Penttil~i (1963) accepts both versions in (67), though speakers tend to prefer. (67) a. Laiva upote-ttiin se-n suoritta-e-ssa saattopalvelus-ta. ship(Nom) sink-PastPass it-Gen perform-2Ptc-Iness escort-service-Part 'The ship was sunk while it was performing escort duty.' b. Laiva upote-ttiin suoritta-e-ssa-an saattopalvelus-ta. ship(Nom) sink-PastPass perform-2Ptc-Iness-3P escort-service-Part 'The ship was sunk while performing escort duty.' The 'translucence' of the demoted subject of passives to anaphora and other con- strual processes is similar to the optionality in (62) and its explanation is the same. In the absence of an extemal subject, either the logical subject (the demoted passive agent) or the highest licensed argument (in this case, the object) may be the antecedent, hence the option in (67). 2.4. Oblique subject constructions 2.4.1. Possessive and necessive constructions Possessive and necessive constructions are another type of sentence with [-SC] logical subjects. Unlike the passive agent, the logical subject of these sentences, the possessor or experiencer, is realizable with oblique case. Placed in Spec-IP position, it is positionally licensed as a subject. Because the subject is positionally licensed, it is (qua subject) locked into Spec-IP position - an instance of the 'freezing effect' (Mohanan, 1992). Our explanation for the freezing effect is that an argument which does not receive structural case can still be structurally licensed as a direct argument by position, but just in that case it either cannot scramble (or if it scrambles, it loses it direct argument properties). (68) a. Minu-lla on Matti / sinu-t. I-Adess be-3Sg Matti(Nom) /you-Acc 'I have Matti / you.' b. *Sinu-t / *Matti on minu-lla. youAcc / Matti(Nom) be-3Sg I-Adess 'I have Matti / you.' This is confirmed by anaphora. An oblique can antecede anaphors only if it is pre- verbal, as in (69a): 34 34 See Wechsler (1995) for discussion of these anaphora facts. P. Ktparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 355 (69) a. Liisa-lla, ol-i hiine-t~ poikayst~ivii-nii olle-ssa-ant.,j Liisa-Ades be-Past(3Sg) him-Acc boyfriend-Ess being-Iness-3Poss Ruotsissa. Sweden-Iness 'Liisa had him as a boyfriend when she was in Sweden.' b. Hiin, ol-i Liisa-llaj poikaystava-na olle-ssa-an~..~ he(Nom) be-Past(3Sg) Liisa-Adess boyfriend-Ess being-Iness-3Poss Ruotsi-ssa. Sweden-Iness 'He was with Liisa as a boyfriend when he was in Sweden.' Liisalla in (69a) is a possessor, hence the highest argument (logical subject), and because of its position quanlifies as a grammatical subject. In (69b), Liisalla is a kind of location, hence not a logical subject. In general, logical subjects (i.e. arguments assigned the highest theta-roles of their predicates) function as grammatical subjects with respect to anaphora regardless of case, provided they are in initial position: (70) a. He-i-st~i, tul-i kuol-tu-a-an, sankare-i-ta. they-P1-Elat becme-Past(3Sg) die-PPP-Part-3P ero-P1-Part 'They became heroes after they died.' b. Peka-n, tayty-i kerto-a Mati-llej ty6-sta-iin,.j. Pekka-Gen must-Past(3Sg) tell-Inf Matti-Allat work-Elat-3P 'Pekka had to tell Matti about his (Pekka's) work.' c. Tyt6-ss~i, on isoiiiti-nsii, nak6-ii. girl-Iness be(3Sg) grandmother(Gen)-3P look-Part 'The girl has her grandmother's looks.' It is important that this is only a property of the logical subject (the most promi- nent argument). Other obliques do not easily antecede anaphors, even if they are placed in Spec-IP position: (71) a. *?Mati-llej kerrot-tiin ty6-stii-~n,/. Matti-Allat tell-PastPass work-Elat-3P 'Matti was told about his work.' b. *?Hei-lt~i, ote-taan juos-tu-aan, veriniiyte. They-Ablat take-Pass run-PPP-3P blood sample 'A blood sample is taken from them after running.' This follows from the preceding generalization about antecedents (Section 2.2.3). 2.5. The dative-genitive [-SC] indirect objects have genitive case if they control a PRO subject of a non- finite clause, and allative (or adessive) case otherwise. 356 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 (72) a. Anno-i-n heid~-n men-n~i. give-Past-lSg they-P1-Gen go-llnf 'I let them go.' b. Anno-i-n hei-lle karhu-n. give-Past-lSg they-P1-Allat bear-Gen 'I gave them a bear.' Historically, this genitive (let us call it the indirect genitive) is the remnant of a now lost dative case. The construction in (72a) appears with a small group of verbs, principally antaa 'give' suoda, sallia 'allow', and kiiskeii 'command'. The question is whether the indirect genitive is assigned by the main verb - the position taken here - or whether it is a genitive subject of the infinitive clause. That is, are 'let' sentences like (73a) analogous to 'force' sentences like (73b), or are they analogous to 'want' sentences like (73c), whose complements take genitive subjects, as do oblique temporal clauses like (73d)? (73) a. Anno-i-n sinu-n / Mati-n nah-d~i karhu-n. let-Pst-lSg you-Gen /Matti-Gen see-llnf bear-Gen 'I let youfMatti see a/the bear.' (genitive indirect object controls 1st inf.) b. Pakot-i-n sinu-t / Mati-n nake-m~i-~in karhu-n. force-Pst-lSg you-Acc / Matti-Gen see-2Inf-Illat bear-Gen 'I forced you / Matti to see a/the bear.' (direct object controls oblique 2nd inf.) c. Halus-i-n sinu-n / Mati-n nake-v~i-n karhu-n. want-Pst-lSg you-Gen /Matti-Gen see-lPart-Gen bear-Gen 'I wanted you / Matti to see a/the bear.' (downstairs genitive subject) d. Nuku-i-n sinu-n / Mati-n n~-de-ss~i karhu-n. sleep-Pst-lSg you-Gen /Matti-Gen see-2Ptc-Iness bear-Gen 'I slept while you / Matti saw a/the bear.' (downstairs genitive subject) Unlike other genitive objects, such as the object of 'force' in (73b), the indirect genitive is invariant under passivization (compare (74a) with (74b)) and under nega- tion, and appears in pro-nouns and plurals as well. This clearly shows that it does not get structural case from the verb of the main clause. (74) a. Sinu-n / Mati-n anne-ttiin n~ih-d~i karhu. you-Gen /Matti-Gen let-PassPst see-llnf bear-Nom 'You were allowed to see a/the bear.' (downstairs nominative object) b. Sinu-t / Matti pakote-ttiin ampu-ma-an karhu. you-Acc /Matti-Nom force-PassPst shoot-2Inf-Illat bear-Gen 'You / Matti were forced to shoot a/the bear.' (downstairs nominative object) c. Sinu-n / Mati-n halut-tiin n~ike-v~i-n karhu-n. you-Gen /Matti-Gen want-PassPst see-lPart-Gen bear-Gen 'It was wanted for you / Matti to see a/the bear.' (downstairs genitive retained) P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 357 d. Nuku-ttiin sinu-n / Mati-n n~ih-de-ss~i karhu-n. sleep-PassPst you-Gen /Matti-Gen see-2Ptc-Iness bear-Gen 'It was slept while you / Matti saw a/the bear.' (downstairs genitive retained) For this reason it is often assumed that the indirect genitive is a genitive subject of the complement clause, like (73c). Carlson (1978) provides telling evidence against this view, and argues that the indirect genitive is an indirect (dative) object of the main verb, on the basis of the data in (74)-(76). These data establish that the (a) sen- tences in (73)-(76) are built like the (b) sentences, and unlike the object comple- ments in the (c) sentences and the temporal adjuncts in the (d) sentences. First, (74a) shows that the downstairs object of the infinitive clause turns nominative if the main verb antaa is passivized, just like the downstairs object of regular object control infinitives like (74b). The reason is that passivization in the main clause eliminates its subject (that is, demotes is [+ HR] argument), making (74a,b) subjectless, which allows nominative object marking in the complement. In contrast, passivization in the main clause has no effect on the complement's subjects sinun and Matin in (74c,d), which continue to trigger genitive objects below them. Since (74a) has no properly licensed subject, the genitives sinun and Matin in (74a) cannot be subjects of the embedded clause, so they must be objects of the main clause. Negation provides similar evidence. The genitive subject of complements and adjuncts creates an opaque domain whose object is immune from the partitivizing force of the main clause's negation (see (75c,d)). As is normally the case with nega- tion, there is quite a bit of variation (depending on scope, presupposition, and prob- ably other factors) but the versions shown here are the preferred ones. This again shows the genitive in (75a) is not a subject of the infinitive, but an object of the main verb. (75) a. E-n not-lSg 'I didn't b. E-n not-lSg 'I didn't c. E-n not-lSg 'I didn't d. E-n not-lSg 'I didn't anta-nut sinu-n n~h-d~i karhu-a. let-PfP you-Gen shoot-llnf bear-Part let you see a/the bear' (downstairs partitive object) pakotta-nut sinu-a n~ike-m~i4in karhu-a. force-PfP you-Part see- llnf bear-Part get you to see a/the bear.' (downstairs partitive object) halun-nut sinu-n / Mati-n nake-v~i-n karhu-n. want-PfP you-Gen /Matti-Gen see-lPart-Gen bear-Gen want you / Matti to see a/the bear.' (downstairs genitive retained) nukku-nut sinu-n / Mati-n nah-de-ss~i karhu-n. sleep-PfP you-Gen /Matti-Gen see-2Ptc-Iness bear-Gen sleep while you / Matti saw a/the bear.' (downstairs genitive retained) Another piece of evidence confirming the object status of indirect genitives is the behavior of the reflexive itse, which requires an antecedent in the same clause. The reflexive itse is grammatical in (76a,b) but not in (76c,d). The judgments, which are 358 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 absolutely crisp, can be explained on the assumption that itse is an object of the main clause in (76a,b) and a subject of the lower clause in (76c,d). (76) a. Anno-i-n itse-ni n~ih-d~i karhu-n. let-Pst-lSg self-(Gen)-lSg shoot-llnf bear-Gen 'I let myself see a/the bear.' (upstairs indirect object reflexivizes) b. Pakot-i-n itse-ni n~ike-m~i~i-n karhu-n. force-Past-lSg self-(Nom)-lSg see-llnf bear-Gen 'I forced myself to see a/the bear.' (upstairs direct object reflexivizes) c. *Halus-i-n itse-ni nah-d~i karhu-n. let-Pst-lSg self-(Gen)-lSg see-llnf bear-Gen 'I wanted myself to see a/the bear.' (reflexivization must be clause-bounded) d. *Nuku-i-n itse-ni nah-de-ss~i karhu-n. sleep-PassPst self-(Gen)-lSg see-2Ptc-Iness bear-Gen 'I slept while myself saw a/the bear.' (reflexivization must be clause-bounded) On the other hand, the indirect genitive of the let construction, unlike other geni- tive objects, is invariant under passivization (compare (74a) with (74b)) and under negation (cf. (75a), and appears in pronouns and plurals as well, where the object normally has morphological accusative and nominative. This shows that unlike the object of 'force', the object of 'let' does not get structural case from the verb of the main clause. That is the basis for the usual assumption that it gets case as a genitive subject of the complement clause, like (73c). If we accept on the strength of the above evidence that the indirect genitive is the object of the main verb, why is it retained in the passive (74b) and under negation (75b), and why does it appear in pronouns and plurals? The reason must be that this type of genitive is an inherent oblique case. The generalization is thus that the recip- ient theta-role of antaa does not bear structural case, i.e. it is [-SC], and receives morphological allative case when the lower role is nominal, and non-structural (inherent) genitive case when the lower role is sentential. Or putting it differently, [-SC] indirect objects are genitive if they control a PRO, and allative case other- wise. This interpretation is corroborated by the variation seen in the verb kiiskeii 'order', which allows both the 'let' construction of the (a) sentences of (73)-(76) and in the 'force' construction of the (b) sentences of (73)-(76), with no detectable semantic or thematic difference: (77) a. K~isk-i-n h~ine-n men-n~i. order-Past-lSg he-Gen go-Inf 'I ordered him to go.' b. K~isk-i-n h~ine-t mene-m~i-~n. order-Past-lSg he-Acc go-Inf-Ill 'I ordered him to go.' P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 359 The two constructions differ minimally in whether the oblique [-HR,-LR] argument is [-SC] or [+ SC]. An additional piece of evidence comes from dialects such as those of H~ae and Satakunta, where the subject of intransitive (typically unaccusative) infinitives that are complements of verbs like antaa are case-marked like objects of the main verb, rather than as invariant genitives (Ikola, 1954: 235). (78) a. Anno-i-n lehm/i-t ol-la sie-ll/i. let-Past-lSg cow-P1Nom be-Inf there 'I let the cows be there.' b. Is/int/i k/isk-i minu-a tul-la. boss(Nom) tell-Past(3Sg) me-Part come-Inf 'The boss told me to come.' The standard language would have gen. pl. lehmien for lehmdt in (78a), and gen. minun for minua in (78b). In our terms, this dialect treats the oblique [-HR,-LR] theta-role as [+SC] rather than [-SC]. A parallel 'promotion' to structural case is seen in necessive constructions such as (79) (Laitinen and Vilkuna, 1993). They have an oblique genitive subject in the stan- dard language, which may, again with intransitive predicates, appear in the form of a nominative internal (non-agreeing) subject in a group of dialects which overlap with those that have the promotion mentioned in the preceding paragraph (the core area being central H~ane, Savo, and Bothnia, according to Laitinen and Vilkuna, 1993: 26). (79) a. N~n/i lista-t ol-isi hyv/i ol-la paksu-j-a. These(PINom) lathe-PINom be-Subj(3Sg) good be-Inf thick-P1-Part 'It would be good for these lathes to be thick.' [It would be good if they were thick.] b. N/i-i-den listo-j-en ol-isi hyv/i ol-la paksu-j-a. These-P1-Gen lathe-PI-Gen be-Subj(3Sg) good be-Inf thick-P1-Part '(id.)' There is however an interesting difference. Unlike oblique genitive object promo- tion, necessive subject promotion does not apply to personal pronouns: (8o) a. *Me ol-isi hyv/i ol-la varovais-i-a. We(Nom) be-Subj(3Sg) good be-inf careful-PI-Part 'For us to be careful would be good.' [It would be good if we were careful.] b. Mei-d~in ol-isi hyv~i ol-la varovais-i-a. We-Gen be-Subj(3Sg) good be-inf careful-PI-Part '(id.)' This is yet another special case marking property of pronouns which we will take up in Section 3. 360 P. Kiparsky I Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 2.6. Summary: The clause types and case configurations of Finnish The four sentence types of Finnish reviewed in Sections 2.1-2.4 are summarized in (81). For each sentence type the first column shows the properties of its subject and the second shows the properties of its object. In the row for morphological case marking the diagnostics of [-HR] are -t in pronouns and -n in nouns; existential sub- jects do not bear [-HR] case, as shown by the fact that they are compatible with gen- itive case marking on the (complement's) object. I leave out the feature [-LR] from the table since it is of interest only for distinguishing between higher and lower objects (R-objects and 1-objects). (81) Transitive Existential Passive Oblique Str. C. Subj Obj Subj Subj Obj Subj Obj Abstr L+HR J L+HRJ - L -HRJ - Morph [ ] [-HR ] [ ] - [-HR] - [-HR] Pos [+ HR] [-HR ] [-HR] - [-HR] [+HR] [-HR] (a) (f) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) The letters at the bottom of the table refer to the case configurations that emerge from this tabulation, which correspond to the conventional categories as shown in (82). (82) a. External Subjects b. Internal Subjects (existential sentences) c. Passive Subjects (demoted pro) d. Passive Objects e. Oblique Subjects (possessors and necessive subjects) f. Objects (other) The diagnostic environments that assign these argument types their 'degrees of subjecthood' group into three sets of criteria, which respectively pick out external arguments, subjects, and the most prominent direct argument. (83) a. External argument diagnostics: positionally licensed [+SC, +HR]. 1. External subjects get genitive case if the verb is nonfinite. 2. External subjects do not get partitive case under negation. 3. External subjects agree in person and number with the finite verb. 4. External subjects can be controlled (PRO). b. Subject diagnostics: [+SC, +HR]. 5. Subjects do not get aspectual partitive case. 6. Presence of a subject requires -n on R-objects (Jahnsson's Rule). P. Kiparsky I Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 361 c. Anaphoric prominence diagnostics: logical subject ([+HR]), or most prominent [+SC] (direct) argument. 7. Prominent arguments may be antecededents of anaphors (possessive suf- fixes). 8. Prominent arguments may require disjoint reference with respect to pro- nouns. 9. Prominent arguments may control PRO. It is clear that the diagnostics do not group in arbitrary ways. The last set, for exam- ple, comprises all and only the prominence-oriented construal processes of the lan- guage. The results are summarized in table (84), where + in a cell marks a 'subject prop- erty'. In some cases the diagnostics are inapplicable, or trivially satisfied. For exam- ple, oblique arguments cannot bear genitive or partitive case, so oblique subjects nat- urally cannot receive genitive case from nonfinite verbs or partitive from negation. In such cases I leave a blank in the table. Parentheses mark the optionality which was noted for anaphora and other construal processes. The shaded areas mark off the plus fields, and define three kinds of structural 'subject' of Finnish, viz. external sub- ject, subject, and most prominent theta-role. (84) ExtSubj r+sc1 A. Abstract case L+HR J B. Morph. case [ ] C. Pos. case [+ HR] 1. Nonfin. Gen. 2. No Neg. Part. 3. Agreement 4. PRO 5. No Asp. Part. 6. J.R. 7. Anaphora 8. Disjoint ref. 9. Controller + 4- IntSubj PassSubj PassObj OblSubj RJ L-HRJ [ ] - [-HR] - [-HR] - [-HR] [+ HR] m w _ m B m m Object [-HR] [-HR] m m B Ł ° .... 1 m B -- / ÷ + i;::. I + 4- .... I conclude that there is no need to impose a scale of subjecthood, and that the concept ofject as neutralization of subject and object is not required. Rather, in so far as there are different kinds of subjects it is because grammatical constraints are keyed to several kinds of prominence, in ways that can be specified exactly by the proposed case features. A set of case-related properties (1-4 in table (84)) sepa- rate external arguments, defined as bearing [+SC,+HR] abstract case and [+HR] positional case, from all other [+SC] arguments. Jahnsson's Rule and aspectual partitivity picks out [+SC,+HR] arguments, and construal processes pick out the 362 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 prominence peak (as well as privileging the external argument in the way discussed above). 3. The noun/pronoun split In Section 2 we found four systematic differences between the syntax of nouns and pronouns. (85) a. Pronominal R-objects have morphological accusative case (19a). b. Only nominal R-objects alternate between genitive and nominative in accord with Jahnsson's Rule (19b, c). c. Pronouns cannot be internal subjects (Section 2.2.3, example (58)). d. Pronouns cannot undergo necessive raising (Section 2.4.2, example (80)). In Section 3.1 I complete the constraint system to account for these data and provide constraint tables for the major phenomena discussed in this paper. In section 3.2 1 show that the constraints relating to the special case marking of pronouns generate the basic typology of split ergativity. In Section 3.3 I argue that the relevant split is actually not that between nouns and pronouns but between projecting and nonprojecting heads. 3.1. The constraints Faithfulness constraints are of two types. MAX constraints require that an abstract Case feature specification [aF] must correspond to the same feature specification [aF] at the morphosyntactic level. DEP constraints require that a morphosyntactic case feature specification [aF] must correspond to the same abstract Case feature specification [~F]. 35 The MAX constraints include the general faithfulness constraint MAX[aF]. (86) MAx[aF]: An argument assigned a theta-role bearing the abstract Case feature specification [aF] must bear the morphosyntactic case feature specification [aF]. The specific MAX constraints that generate the case splits between pronouns sin- gle out the input/output correspondence for the feature [HR] in pronouns and for the feature [LR] in nouns. Using D to symbolize pronouns, and using N to symbolize nouns, we have MAx[-HR]/D and MAx[-LR]/N. 36 35 In phonology, MAX and DEP constraints pertain to segments, not features. Another point: this for- mulation of the constraints makes the natural but perhaps not inevitable assumption that Semantic Form is the 'Input' and morphosyntactic structure is the 'Output'. Since Correspondence Theory is symmetri- cal as between Input and Output, nothing hangs on this. If it should turn out to be the other way round, our MAX constraints would simply become DEP constraints, and vice versa. 36 It may be possible to formulate them more sweepingly as MAx[aHR],fD and MAx[aLR]/N, but since MAx[+F] is undominated (in Finnish) the added effect is not detectable, so I have stayed with the more conservative formulation. P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 363 (87) a. MAx[-HR]/D: A pronominal argument assigned a theta-role bearing the abstract structural Case feature specification [-HR] must bear the mor- phosyntactic case feature specification [-HR]. b. MAx[-LR]/N: A nominal argument assigned a theta-role bearing the abstract structural Case feature specification [-LR] must bear the mor- phosyntactic case feature specification [-LR]. These are privileged MAX constraints which are subsumed by the general MAx[aF] constraint but which become visible when they are ranked ahead of it and other con- straints intervene between them. Loosely put, (87a) says that a pronominal object should be accusative (rather than nominative, genitive, or ergative), and (87b) says that a nominal subject or higher object should be ergative or genitive (rather than accusative or nominative). The effect of these constraints is in principle twofold. Either some other morphosyntactic case than the disfavored one is assigned, or the offending configuration is avoided by changing the abstract case. For example, a potential violation of (87a) in a pronoun may be avoided by assigning the pronoun a [-HR] morphological case, or by assigning the pronoun abstract [+HR] case, i. e. making it a subject. These constraints are potentially violable like any other constraint, if higher- ranked constraints so require, and actual violations are amply instantiated in our analysis. The special affinity of pronouns for morphological accusative case observed in Finnnish (see (85a)) can now be seen to be a consequence of MAx[-HR]/D. Correspondingly, the fact that nominal R-objects get genitive case when Jahns- son's Rule does not permit them to have nominative case (see (85b)) is a conse- quence of MAx[-LR]/N. These are all the constraints we need for the basic case assignment patterns. 37 The ranking must be as in (88), and its working is illustrated for the key cases in the table below: 38 (88) MAx[-HR]]D >> *[-HR] >> JR >> Max[etF] >> *[~tF] The constraint tables for objects and subjects are shown in (89) and (90). 37 As they stand, our constraints do not cover adnominal genitives, such as karhu-n pesii 'the bear's den', minu-n talo-ni 'my house', or genitives with nonfinite verb forms. They could be derived if we add a constraint requiring nominative external arguments to show subject-verb agreement. 38 In the glosses I translate karhu as 'the bear', but Finnish has no article and 'a bear' would be an equally good gloss. In 'a bear was seen' the preferred word order would then be reversed to ndhtiin karhu. 364 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 (89) Objects [-HR,-LR]: ndit karhun 'you saw the bear (Gen.)' la. karhu-t [-HR,-LR] (Acc.) lb. ~e karhu-n [+ HR] (Gen.) lc. karhu-0 [ ] (Nom.) ld. karhu-a [-HR] (Part.) [-HR,-LR]: ndit hdnet 'you saw him (Acc.)' 2a. ~ sinu-t [-HR,-LR] (Acc.) 2b. sinu-n [+ HR] (Gen.) 2c. sina-0 [ ] (Nom.) 2d. sinu-a [-HR] (Part.) [-HR,+ LR]: l~it hfintd 'you hit him (Prt.)' 3a. hane-t [-HR,-LR] (Acc.) 3b. h/ine-n [+ HR] (Gen.) 3c. h/in-0 [ ] (Nom.) 3d. ~ han-ta [-HR] (Part.) [-HR,-LR]: karhu niihtiin 'the bear (Nom.) was seen' 4a. karhu-t [-HR,-LR] (Acc.) 4b. karhu-n [+ HR] (Gen.) 4c. ~ karhu-0 [ ] (Nom.) 4d. karhu-a [-HR] (Part.) [-HR,-LR]: hdnet ndhtiin 'he (Acc.) was seen' 5a. ~ h~tne-t [-HR,-LR] (Acc.) 5b. h/ine-n [+ HR] (Gen.) 5c. h/in-0 [ ] (Nom.) 5d. han-ta [-HR] (Part.) [-HR,+ LR]: hdntd ly~itiin 'he (Part.) was hit' 6a. h~ine-t [-HR,-LR] (Acc.) 6b. h/ine-n [+ HR] (Gen.) 6c. h/m-0 [ ] (Nom.) 6d. ~ h~in-ta [-HR] (Part.) [-HR,-LR]: niiit karhut 'you saw the bears (Nom.)' 7a. karhu-t [-HR,-LR] (Acc.) 7b. karhu-je-n [+ HR] (Gen.) 7c. ~ karhu-t [ ] (Nom.) 7d. karhu-j-a [-HR] (Part.) , . , i~. ~~ ~1, g, 'mr'" ~ P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 365 (90) Subjects r--n x x [+ HR,+ LR]: sinii tulit 'you (Nom.) came' la. sinu-t [-HR,-LR] (Acc.) * " '" Ł .... ~?i ~ lb. sinu-n [+ HR] (Gen.) * * lc. ~r sina-0 [ ] (Nom.) * ld. sinu-a [-HR] (Part.) * .... ,,~ ~, [+ HR,-LR]: sinai n~iit h~inet 'you (Nom.) saw him' 2a. sinu-t [-HR,-LR] (Acc.) * 2b. sinu-n [+ HR] (Gen.) * * 2c. ~r sinai-0 [ ] (Nom.) * 2d. sinu-a [-HR] (Part.) * [+ HR,-LR]: Matti n~iki h~net 'M. (Nom.) saw him' 3a. Mati-t [-HR,-LR] (Acc.) * ..... 3b. Mati-n [+ HR] (Gen.) * * 3c. ~r Matti-0 [ ] (Nom.) * 3d. Matti-a [-HR] (Part.) * Corresponding to the two special MAX constraints MAx[-HR]/D and MAx[-LR]/ N, we have the two special DEP constraints in (91): (91) a. DEP[-HR]/D: A pronominal argument bearing the morphosyntactic struc- tural case feature [-HR] must be assigned a theta-role bearing the abstract Case feature [-HR]. b. DEP[-LR]/N: A nominal argument bearing the morphosyntactic structural case feature [-LR] must be assigned a theta-role bearing the abstract Case feature [-LR]. These are again privileged DEP constraints which are subsumed by the general DEP[~F] constraint but which become visible when they are ranked ahead of it and other constraints intervene between them. Informally put, (91a) says that pronominals which bear accusative and dative case should not be subjects, and (91b) says that nominals which bear genitive or ergative case should not be lowest objects. The fact that pronouns cannot be internal subjects (see (85c)) is a consequence of DEP[-HR]/D. All internal subjects involve a mismatch of [+HR] abstract case with [-HR] morphological case. What DEP[-HR]/D says is that this mismatch is least tol- erable in pronouns. Therefore, this constraint must dominate whatever constraint 366 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 forces subjects into the VP (see 2.2 for inconclusive comments on what that constraint might be). By the same reasoning, the fact that only nouns undergo necessive raising (see (85d)) is a consequence of DEP[-HR]/D, for necessive raising also yields internal subjects. Note that only direct arguments can violate DEP[-HR]/D as formulated. This justifies our assumption that nonstructural case (assigned to arguments which are 'demoted' by the feature [-SC]) does not fall under the faithfulness constraints. Necessive raising is blocked in pronouns because it would there create a violation of DEP[-HR]/D. This completes the explanation of the four special features of pronominal case marking summarized in (85c), which emerged from the descriptive analysis in Sec- tion 2. The following subsection shows that these Finnish facts are reflexes of the principles that govern split ergativity. 3.2. Case neutralization and case split It is well known that the case marking in different classes of nominals is often dif- ferentiated according to the 'animacy' hierarchy in (92). 39 (92) [~P] 2P 3P PN Human Animate Inanimate The basic generalization is as follows: (93) a. Ergative case is overtly marked on the low end of the hierarchy. b. Accusative case is overtly marked on the high end of the hierarchy. The most familiar reflection of this tendency is the split ergativity pattern illus- trated in (94) for Dyirbal (Dixon, 1972), where [-LR] is neutralized in pronouns and [-HR] is neutralized in nouns: 4° (94) Ergative Nominative Accusative Nouns -nggu, -ru 0 0 Pronouns 0 0 -na 39 The hierarchy was extensively discussed by Kenneth Hale in lectures at M.I.T. m the late sixties and shown to play an important role in Tanoan syntax in Hale (1972); see Silverstein (1976) and Dixon (1994) for typological and historical documentation, with particular reference to ergative case systems. 40 This is actually not exactly Dixon's assignment of cases but the one argued for by Goddard (1982). P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 367 Split ergativity of this kind results when the distinction between Ergative and Nom- inative is suppressed (in favor of Nominative) on the high end of the scale (here in Pronouns) and the distinction between Accusative and Nominative is suppressed (also in favor of Nominative) on the low end of the scale (here in Nouns). (95) a. ngadya bangun lsg(NOM) detlI-ERG 'I, the woman (hit the man).' b. ngadya balan dyugumbil (bani-yu) lsg(NOM) detlI(NOM) woman-(NOM) (come-PRET) 'I, the woman, (came).' c. ngaygu-na balan dyugumbil (balga-n bangul lsg-ACC detlI(NOM)woman(NOM) (hit-PRET detI-ERG 'Me, the woman (the man hit).' dyugumbi-ru (bayi yara balga-n) woman-ERG (detI-ACC man-ACC hit-PRET) yara-nggu) man-ERG) The two neutralizations are independent of each other. First, they can take place at different cutoff-points on the scale, as in Djapu (Morphy, 1983): (96) Ergative Nominative Accusative Non-human -thu Human -thu -nha Pronouns -nha Secondly, either one can take place without the other. Adyghe has only the Erga- tive/Nominative neutralization on the high end, (97) 'house' 'I' Nom. vno(-r) so Erg. vno-m so and English has only the Accusative/ Nominative neutralization on the low end ('split accusativity'): (98) Nom. house I Acc. house me English is of course not the most convincing example because case is arguably not syntactically relevant in English, but this neutralization is very widespread, occur- ring for example in French, Ostyak (Finno-Ugric), Zuni (isolate), Yukagir (isolate), Yoruba (Niger-Congo), Kobon (New Guinea), and in numerous ergative languages. Ergative case, like genitive case, has the feature value [-LR]. Like ergative case, genitive is likewise neutralized with nominative case on the high end of the scale 368 P. Ktparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 ('split genitivity'). In Yukagir, first and second person pronouns have no genitive ending (Angere, 1956: 74, 155). (99) Met ecie. I(Nom) house(Nom) 'My house.' Alma-n terikeh. Shaman-Oen wife(Nom) 'The shaman's wife. ' These case splits are part of a larger pattern. Split dativity, as in Spanish and Hindi, involves use of the dative (with the case features [-LR,-HR]) in preference to nominative case to mark objects at the high end of the scale: (100) Pedro vio a una mujer (*a un accidente). Pedro saw Data woman (Dat an accident). 'Pedro saw a (specific) woman (an accident).' Split case is Faithfulness due to the two MAX constraints already stated in (87). A complete account of case splits would require that MAx[-HR]/D and MAx[-LR]/N be relativized to the scale in (92) to get two constraint hierarchies: (101) a. MAx[-HR]/1P, MAx[-HR]/1, 2P .... b. MAX[-LR]/INANIM, MAX[-LR]]NONHUMAN .... The effects of these constraints are summarized in table (102). (102) Case marking: MAx[-LR]/N MAx[-HRI/D I*aF IMax[ F] 1. [+HR,-LR] Pro [-HR,+LR] NP: 'I threw the rock' a. [ ][ ](Nom+Nom) b. [ ] [-LR] (Nom+Erg) c. [ ] [-HR] (Nom+Acc) d. [-HR] [ ] (Acc+Nom) e. [-HR] [-LR] (Acc+ Erg) f. [-LR] [ ] (Erg+Nom) g. [-LR] [-HR] (Erg+ Acc) 2. [+ HR,-LR] NP [-HR,+LR] Pro: 'The rock hit me' a. [ ][ ](Nom+Nom) * b. [ ] [-LR] (Nom+Erg) * c. [ ] [-HR] (Nom+Acc) d. [-HR] [ ] (Acc+Nom) e. [-HR] [-LR] (Acc+Erg) f. [-LR] [ ] (Erg+Nom) g. [-LR] [-HR] (Erg+Acc) P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 369 The rankings of the constraints generate the core typology of split case: (103) a. Dyirbal N Pro A: [+HR,-LR] Erg 0 O: [-HR,+LR] 0 Acc S: [+HR,+LR] 0 0 MAx[-LR]/N, MAx[-HR]/D >> MAX[~tF] b. Adyghe N Pro A: [+HR,-LR] Erg 0 O: [-HR,+LR] 0 0 S: [-HR,+LR] 0 0 MAX[-LR]/N >> *[(zF] >> MAx[-HR]/D, MAx[aF] C. English N Pro A: [+HR,-LR] 0 0 O: [-HR,+LR] 0 Acc S: [+HR,+LR] 0 0 MAx[-HR]/D >> *[(zF] >> MAx[-LR]/N, MAX[ofF] d. Hindi N Pro A: [+HR,-LR] Erg Erg O: [-HR,+LR] Acc Acc S: [+ HR,+ LR] 0 0 MAX[~tF] >> MAx[-HR]/D, MAx[-LR]/N, *[~tF] e. No Accusative or Ergative case *[aF] >> MAx[-HR]/D, MAx[-LR]/N, MAX[OfF] Inspection of (102) shows that 'split ergativity' results when constraints MAx[-HR]/D and/or MAx[-LR]/N are ranked above (28b). The same constraints give rise to 'split accusativity', 'split dativity', and 'split genitivity'. I illustrate this treatment of case split with a sketch of split dativity in Yimas. The case marking is summarized in (104) (Foley, 1991): 370 (104) P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 Abstract Case Abstract case features: 1/2P other A _,.R] LRJ ka mp~ S ++"gl LRJ ama impa O D I+LHR R] [_-LRHR 1 nga mpu Assuming that Yimas' structural cases are as in (105), (105) a. ka, mpi: [-LR] (Ergative) b. ama, impa: [ 1 (Nominative) c. nga, mpu: [-HR] (Accusative/Dative) the split is the result of assigning dative case ([-HR, -LR]) in place of nominative case to mark direct objects on the high end of the scale by MAX[-HR]/D: (106) Split dativity MAx[-HR]/1,2P *[aF] 1. [-HR,+ LR], Pronoun object a. [ ] (Nominative) b. ~ [-HR] (Accusative) 2. [-HR,+ LR], Noun object a. ~ [ ] (Nominative) b. [-HR] (Accusative) Inverse morphology can be seen as a type of ergative head marking which assigns the morpho-logical case feature [-LR] to the subject, where the special Faithfulness constraints outrank the general faithfulness constraints. As a simple example we take the distribution of direct and inverse forms in the Paleosiberian language Koryak (after Comrie 1980: 68). (107) Object Subject 1st Person 2nd Person 3rd Singular 3rd Plural 1 st Person direct inverse inverse inverse 2nd Person direct direct inverse inverse 3rd Singular direct direct direct inverse 3rd Plural direct direct direct inverse P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 371 To account for the differentiation between singular and plural we further differ- entiate the hier-archy as in (101a), and build in the number asymmetry by means of a constraint MAx[-LR]/PL] ('plural transitive subjects must be marked as ergative'). The Koryak data are then derived as shown. (108) MAx[-LR]/3 MAx[-LR]/2,3 MAx[-LR]/PL] [*[ctF] 1. [+ HR,-LR] 1Sg [-HR,+LR] 3Sg: 'I saw you.' la. [-LR] [ ] (Inv.) lb. ~r [ ] [ ] (Dir.) 2. [+ HR,-LR] 2Sg [-HR,+ LR] 1Sg: 'You saw me.' 2b. [ ] [ ](Dir.) * 3. [+HR,-LR] 3Sg [-HR,+LR] 3PI: 'He saw them.' 2a. [-LR] [ ] (Inv.) * * [[,,' ~-,TŁ 2b. ~r [ ][ ](Dir.) * * 4. [+ HR,-LR] 3P1 [-HR,+ LR] 3Sg: 'They saw him.' 2a. ~ [-LR] [ ] (Inv.) * 2b. [ ][ ](Dir.) * The upshot is that an 'ergative language' is a language that has ergative case (viz. [-LR]), no more, no less. There is no 'ergative parameter', and no ergative-specific grammatical machinery involving functional categories, special coindexing mecha- nisms, etc. 'Ergativity"' is no different from 'genitivity', 'ablativity', or 'adessivity'. The same constraints that interact to give the ty-pology of ergativity work in non- ergative languages such as Finnish. The parallelism is underscored by that fact that in Finnish child language and in some dialects, the accusative ending -t is extended from pronouns to proper names and appellatives, e.g. Lauri-t, isi-t 'daddy' (Raisanen, 1975; Hakulinen and Karls- son, 1979: 188). This development results in an accusative comparable to that of the ergative language Rennellese, which marks a direct object with i if it is a pronoun or proper noun (Chung, 1976: 299). 3.3. The basis of the noun~pronoun split We have repeatedly referred to the contrast between the nominal and pronominal paradigms, manifested in the presence of morphological accusative case in the latter. This involved a slight oversimplification of the actual distribution of the two declen- sion types, for some pronouns actually follow the nominal declension. These include the so-called 3P neuter pronouns se (Sg.) and ne (P1.) and (optionally) the interroga- tive kuka, ken discussed in Section 1.3. (109) a. *Hiin nAh-tiin. Hiine-t niih-tiin. He(Nom) see-PassPast He-Acc see-PassPast 'He was seen.' 372 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 b. Se n~ih-tiin. *Se-n n~ih-tiin It(Nom) see-PassPast It-Gen see-PassPast 'It was seen.' *He ol-isi hyv~i ol-la varovais-i-a. They(Nom) be-Subj(3Sg) good be-Inf careful-P1-Part 'It would be good for them to be careful.' Ne ol-isi hyv~i ol-la paksu-j-a. They(P1Nom) be-Subj(3Sg) good be-Inf thick-P1-Part 'It would be good for them to be thick.' It is evident therefore that the dividing line does not run exactly between nouns and pronouns. The real division seems to be between nonprojecting DPs and projecting DPs. Personal pronouns are intransitive determiners, i.e. they cannot take NP comple- ments. Se is not a personal pronoun but a determiner that can take NP complements; syntactically it belongs to the same class as a demonstrative pronoun like tdmii 'this (one)', orjoku 'some(one)'. The same is true of the relevant cases of kuka (e.g. kuka roisto 'what evildoer?'), As (110b) illustrates, they combine freely even with NPs denoting humans. 41 (110) a. b. *H~in mies n~ih-tiin. He(Nom) man see-PassPast 'He man was seen.' Se mies n~-tiin. That(Nom) man see-PassPast 'That man was seen.' Assuming the structures in (111) and (112) we can explain the failure of transitive Ds to get accusative case from their need to agree morphologically with the nominal head, which cannot get accusative case, cf. the cases discussed in 1.3. (111) DP DP DP P / NP P , I D N D N D N se mies se 0 0 mies 4~ This throws doubt on the suggestion sometimes made that animacy is the relevant criterion (Nelson, 1998: 161). P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 373 (112) DP L D I hAn The proposed structural distinction is independently supported by yet another apparent noun/pronoun split which also groups the pronouns se and kuka, ken with the nouns. Nouns agree in person and number with a pronominal possessor, but not with a nominal possessor or with possessive se-n 'its', kene-n 'whose'. This differ- ence follows on the assumption that only nonprojecting categories trigger possessive agreement. (113) NP DP N' D N se-n miehe-n karhu 'that man's bear' NP DP N' D N se-n 0 karhu (114) NP DP N' I I D N hgne-n karhu+nsa 3.4. Conclusion 'his bear' I have argued that abstract Case is defined by the same category system at Seman- tic Form and in morphosyntactic representations, and that case assignment is deter- mined by optimizing that correspondence between the cases at the two levels subject to a set of ranked constraints. A theory built on this principle was shown to provide a natural account of Finnish clause structure with is various kinds of subjects and its bewildering mismatches between grammatical relations, structural positions, and morphosyntactic case. At the same time these findings constitute a small contribu- tion to the development of OT-based syntax. I show that OT brings two key improvements to an earlier account where the relation between abstract Case and morphosyntactic case was governed by an unviolable Unification constraint. First, the more complex case system of Finnish requires more radical but violable FAITH- FULNESS constraints of the sort that OT makes available. Secondly, OT provides a 374 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 framework where universal constraints motivated by cross-linguistic typological generalizations can be mobilized to explain the apparently idiosyncratic case alter- nations of Finnish. References Alsina, Alex, 1996. Passive types and the theory of object asymmetries. Natural Language and Linguis- tic Theory 14, 673-723. Angere, Johannes, 1956. Die uralo-jukagirische Frage. Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell. Bierwisch, Manfred, 1983. Semantische und konzeptuelle R~ipresentation lexikalischer Einheiten. In: W. Motsch and R. Ruzicka (eds.), Untersuchungen zur Semantik, 125-175. Berlin: Akademie-Vedag. Bierwisch, Manfred, 1986. On the nature of semantic form in natural language. In: F. Klix and H. Hangendorf (eds.), Human memory and cognitive capabilities, Part B, 765-783. Amsterdam: Else- vier. Bierwisch, Manfred and Robert Schreuder, 1992. From concepts to lexical items. Cognition 42: 23-60. Bresnan, Joan and Jonni M. Kanerva, 1989. Locative Inversion in Chiche~,a: A case study of factoriza- tion in grammar. Linguistic Inquiry 20, 1-50. Carlson, Laud, 1978. Central problems in Finnish syntax, Parts I-II. Manuscript, MIT Department of Linguistics. Chomsky, Noam, 1981. Lectures on government and binding. Foris: Dordrecht. Comrie, Bernard, 1979. Degrees of ergativity: Some Chukchee evidence. In: Frans Plank (ed.), Ergativ- ity. London: Academic Press. Chung, Sandra, 1978. Case marking and grammatical relations in Polynesian. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. Dixon, R.M.W., 1972. A grammar of Dyirbal. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Dixon, R.M.W., 1979. Ergativity. Language 55, 59-138. Dixon, R.M.W., 1994. Ergativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Dowty, David R., 1979. Word meaning and Montague grammar. Dordrecht: Reidel. Dowty, David, 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argument selection. Language 67, 547-619. Foley, William and Robert van Valin, 1984. Functional syntax and universal grammar. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Foley, William, 1991. The Yimas language. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. Goddard, Cliff, 1982. Case systems and case marking in Australian languages: a new interpretation. Australian Journal of Linguistics 2, 169-196. Giv6n, Talmy, 1984. Syntax: A functmnal-typological introduction, 1. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Grunthal, W., 1941. Itamerensuomalaisten kielten yksik6n nominatiivi objektln edustajana aktiivin yhteydess~i. Suomalaisen Kirjalhsuuden Seuran Toimituksia 218. Helsmki: SKS. Guflfoyle, Eithne, Henrietta Hung and Lisa Travis, 1992. SPEC of IP and SPEC of VO: Two subjects in Malayo-Polynesian languages. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 10: 375--414. Hakanen, Aimo, 1972. Normaalilause ja eksistentiaalilause. (Abstract: Normalsatz und Existentialsatz.) Sananjaika 14, 36--6. Hakulinen, Auli and Fred Karlsson, 1973. Missing persons: On generic sentences in Finnish. CLS 9, 157-171. Hakulinen, Auli and Fred Karlsson, 1979. Nykysuomen lauseoppia. Helsinki: Suomalaisen Kirjallisuu- den Seura. Hakulinen, Lauri, 1968. Suomen kielen rakenne ja kehitys. Helsinki: Otava. Heinamfiki, Orvokki, 1984. Aspect in Finnish. In: Casper de Groot and Hannu Tommola (ed.), Aspect bound. Dordrecht: Foris. Hale, Kenneth, 1972. A new perspective on American Indian Linguistics. With appendix by Albert Alvarez. In: Alfonso Ortiz (ed.), New perspectives on the Pueblos, 87-103. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. Ikola, Osmo, 1954. Suomen lauseopin ongelmia. (Abstract: Probleme der f'mnischen Satzlehre.) Viritt~ij~i 58, 209-245. P. Ktparsky / Lmgua 111 (2001) 315-376 375 Ikola, Osmo, 1955. Suomen lauseopin ongelmia IV. (Abstract: Probleme der finnischen Satzlehre IV.) Viritt ~ij~i 59, 319-332. Ikola, Osmo, 1961. Lauseopin kysymyksi~i. Tietolipas 26. Forssa. Ikola, Osmo, 1974. Lauseenvastikeoppia. Helsinki: SKS. Itkonen, Erkki, 1966. Kieli ja sen tutkimus. Helsinki: WSOY. Itkonen, Terho, 1974. Ergatiivisuutta suomessa, I. (Abstract: Ergativity in Finnish.) Virittaj~i 78, 379-398. Itkonen, Terho, 1975a. Ergatiivisuutta suomessa, II. (Includes English abstract). Viritt~ij~i 79, 31-65. Itkonen, Terho, 1975b. Yksipersoonaisten ilmausten pulmia. In: T. Itkonen, N'aill~i n~ymin. Helsinki: SKS. Itkonen, Terho, 1976a. Er~i~in sijamuodon ongelmia. Opusculae Instituti Linguae Fennicae, Universitas Helsingiensis 53. Itkonen, Terho, 1976b. Syntaktisten vaikutusyhteyksien luonteesta. (Abstract: 'Non-generative phenom- ena in Finnish morphology and syntax.') Virittaja 80, 52-8l. Itkonen, Terho, 1980. Spesies suomalaisissa ja germaanisissa kieliss~i. (Abstract: Definiteness in Finnish and in Germanic languages.) Viritt~ij~i 84, 27-38. Jackendoff, Ray, 1990. Semantic structures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Jahnsson, A.W., 1871. Finska spr~takets satslara. FOr skolornas behof. Helsingfors: s.n. Joppen, Sandra, 1998. Structural arguments with semantic case. The case of causees and recipients in 4- place predicates. Workshop on the effects of morphological case, Utrecht. Kanerva, Jonni, 1987. Morphological integrity and syntax: The evidence from Finnish possessive suf- fixes. Language 63, 498-521. Karlsson, Fred, 1978. Normaalilauseen tematiikka ja eksistentiaalilauseiden ongelma. Rakenteita: Juh- lakirja Osmo Ikolan 60-vuotisp~iiviiksi. Turku: Turun Yliopiston Suomalaisen ja Yleisen kielitieteen laitoksen julkalsuja. Karlsson, Fred, 1982. Kieliteorian relevanssi suomen kielen opetukselle. In: Fred Karlsson (ed.), Suoml vieraana kielen~i. Helsinki: WSOY. Karttunen, Lauri, 1975. On the syntax of the word paIjon in Finnish. Congressus Tertius Intemationalis Fenno-Ugristarum. Pars I. Acta Linguistica. Tallinn: Valgus. Kiparsky, Paul, 1997. The rise of positional licensing. In: Ans van Kemenade and Nigel Vincent (eds), Parameters of morphosyntactic change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Kiparsky, Paul, 1998. Partitive case and aspect. In: Miriam Butt and Wilhelm Geuder (eds.), Projecting from the lexicon, 265-307. Stanford, CSLI. Klokeid, Terry, 1978. Nominal inflection in Pamanyungan. In: Wemer Abraham (ed.), Valence, seman- tic case, and grammatical relations, 125-175. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Kratzer, Angelika, 1995. Stage-level and individual-level predicates. In: Gregory Carlson and Francis Jeffry PeUetier (ed.), The generic book, 125-175. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Kuroda, Sige-Yuki, 1972. The categorical and the thetic judgment. Foundations of Language 9, 153-185. Kuroda, Sige-Yuki, 1992. Japanese syntax and semantics. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Ladusaw, William A., 1994. Thetic and categorical, stage and individual, weak and strong. In: Mandy Harvey and Lynn Santelmann (eds.), Proceedings from semantics and linguistic theory IV, 220--229. Cornell University, Department of Modem Languages and Linguistics. Laitinen, Lea and Maria Vilkuna, 1993. Case-marking in necessive constructions. In: Anders Holmberg and Urpo Nikanne (eds.), Case and other functional categories in Finnish syntax, 23-48. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Leino, Pentti, 1991. Lauseet ja tilanteet. Helsinki: Suomalaisen Kirjallisuuden Seura. Levin, Beth and Malka Rappaport Hovav, 1995. Unaccusatwity: At the syntax-lexical semantic inter- face. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Levin, Lorraine, 1986. Operations on lexical forms: Unaccusative rules in Germanic languages. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT. Longobardi, Giuseppe, 1996. The syntax of N-raising: A minimalist theory. OTS Working Papers, Utrecht University. Maling, Joan, 1993. Of nominative and accusative. In: Anders Holmberg and Urpo Nikanne (eds.), Case and other functional categories in Finnish syntax, 49-74. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 376 P. Kiparsky / Lingua 111 (2001) 315-376 McCarthy, John and Alan Prince, 1995. Faithfulness and reduplicative identity. In: S. Beckman, L. Walsh Dickey, S. Urbanczyk (eds.), University of Massachusetts Occasional Papers in Linguistics 18. Papers in Optinality Theory, 249-384. Milsark, Gary,1985, Case theory and the grammar of Finnish. NELS 15, 319-331. Mitchell, Erika, 1991. Case and the Finnish object. Cornell Working Papers in Linguistics 9, 193-228. Mohanan, Tara, 1992. Word order in Hindi. Presented at the Syntax Workshop, Stanford. Morphy, Frances, 1983. Djapu, a Yolngu dialect. In: R.M.W. Dixon and Barry Blake (eds.), Handbook of Australian languages 3. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. Nelson, Diane, 1998. Grammatical case assignment in Finnish. New York: Garland. N~kanne, Urpo, 1990. Zones and tiers. Helsinki: Finnish Literature Society. Ojeda, Almerindo, 1997. A semantics for the counting numerals of Latin. Journal of Semantics 14, 143-171. Penttil~i, Aarni, 1963. Suomen kielioppi. Helsinki: WSOY. Pifion, Christopher, 1995. A mereology for aspectuality. Ph.D. Dissertation, Stanford University. Pollard, Carl and Ivan A. Sag, 1994. Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press and Center for the Study of Language and Information. Reime, Hannu, 1993. Accusative marking in Finnish. In: Anders Holmberg and Urpo Nikanne (eds.), Case and other functional categories in Finnish syntax, 89-109. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Rosengren, Inger. 1997. The thefic/categorical distinction revisited once more. Linguistics 35, 439--479. R~iis~inen, Alpo, 1975. Havaintoja lastenkielest~i. Viritt ~ij~i 79, 55-68. Sadeniemi, Matti, 1955. Subjektin totaalisuudesta ja partiaalisuudesta. Viritt~ij~t 59, 10-17. Setal~i, E.N., 1880. Suomen kielen lause-oppi. Helsinki: Holm. Silverstein, Michael, 1976. Hierarchy of features and ergativity. In: R.M.W. Dixon (ed.), Grammatical categories in Australian languages, 112-171. Canberra, Australian Institute of Abo-riginal Studies. Siro, Paavo, 1974. Eksistentiaalilauseen h~n~ih~cinverkkoa. Viritt~ij~i 78, 35--46. Smith, Henry, 1992. Restrictiveness in case theory. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University. Also published by Cambridge University Press, 1996. Taraldsen, Tarald, 1985. On the distribution of nominative objects in Finnish. In: Pieter Muysken and Henk van Riemsdijk (eds.), Features and projections. Dordrecht: Foris. Timberlake, Alan, 1974. The nominative object in Slavic, Baltic, and West Finnic. Slavistische Beitr~ige 82. Berlin: Otto Sagner. Toivainen, Jorma, 1993. The nature of the accusative in Finnish. In: Anders Holmberg and Urpo Nikanne (eds.), Case and other functional categories in Finnish syntax, 111-128. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Vainikka, Anne, 1993. The three structural cases in Finnish. In: Anders Holmberg and Urpo Nikanne (eds.), Case and other functional categories in Finnish syntax, 129-159. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Vainikka, Anne and Joan Maling, 1996. Is partitive case inherent or structural? In: J. Hoeksema (ed.), Partitives. Studies on the syntax and semantics of partitive and related constructions. Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter. Vilkuna, Mafia, 1989. Free word order in Finnish: Its syntax and discourse functions. Helsinki: Suoma- laisen Kirjallisuuden Seura. Vilkuna, Mafia, 1996. Suomen lauseopin perusteet. Helsinki: Edita. W~naki, BiSrje, 1976. On textual functions of existential sentences in Finnish. In: Frances Karttunen and R.T. Harms (eds.), Papers from the Transatlantic Finnish Conference. Texas Linguistic Forum 5, 151-164. Austin, Texas: Department of Linguistics, University of Texas.. Wechsler, Stephen, 1995. Subject position in Finnish: Evidence from the possessive Reflexive. Paper read at the 69th annual meeting of the Linguistic Society of America, New Orleans. Wechsler, Stephen and Yae-Sheik Lee, 1996. The domain of direct case assignment. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 15, 629-664. Whorf, Benjamin, 1946. The Hopi language, Toreva dialect. In: Linguistic Structures of Native Amer- ica. New York: Viking Fund Publications in Anthropology, 6. Wiik, Kalevi, 1974. Suomen eksistentiaalilauseiden 'subjekti'. Turnn Yliopiston fonetiikan laitoksen julkaisuja, 13. Wunderlich, Dieter, 1997. Cause and the structure of verbs. Linguistic Inquiry 28, 27-68. Yip, Moira, Joan Maling and Ray Jackendoff, 1987. Case in tiers. Language 63,217-250. 