ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001)419-464 L n ua www.elsevier.nl~ocate/hngua Dative" The heterogeneity of the mapping among morphological case, grammatical functions, and thematic roles Joan Maling* Brandeis Universl~, l/Men Center, MS-OI3, Waltham, MA 02454-9110, USA Abstract This paper examines the mappings among morphological case, grammatical functions and thematic roles, focusing on dative as a place where the mapping between the morphosyntax and semantics is often assumed to be particularly regular. Evidence is provided from three Germanic languages, English, German and Icelandic, which shows that the mappings are more heterogeneous than is generally acknowledged. An investigation of both co-occurrence restrictions and the lexical restrictions on adnominal genitives, middle formation and sec- ondary predication suggests that the linking of dative case to a verbal argument does not play a role in restricting lexical rules. Accusative goals are shown to behave in most respects just like dative goals, and dative themes just like accusative themes. Since the objects of transitive verbs do not all behave alike, theme cannot be treated as the default theta-role on verbal objects, and lexical rules may need to refer to the content of theta-roles, not just their relative position in a verb's theta-grid. © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Case; Dative; Grammatical functions; Thematic roles; Secondary predicates; Adnominal genitives; Middle formation; Icelandic *~ I am grateful to Ray Jackendoff, Knud Larnbrecht, Cathy O'Connor, Rex Sprouse, Markus Steinbach and two anonymous reviewers for very useful comments on an earlier version of this paper. For insight- ful observations and the grammaticality judgments without which this paper would not exist, I would like to thank: Daniel Btiring, Katharina Hartmann, Markus Steinbach, Gert Webelhuth, Heike Wiese, Wilfried Wilms, Martina Wiltschko, Susi Wurmbrand (German); Magmis E~vald BjOrnsson, J6hannes Gfsli J6nsson, Helgi Sktili Kjartansson, P6rhallur Eyth6rsson (Icelandic); Jong Sup Jun, Soowon Kim (Korean); Oystem A. Vangsnes (Norwegian); Sergey Avrutin, Vladimir Levykin (Russian). The usual disclaimers apply. Research for this paper was supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant SBR-9223725 to Brandeis University. Last but not least, special thanks are due to the organizers of the Utrecht Workshop on morphological case: Helen de Hoop, Olaf Koeneman, Iris Mulders and Fred Weerman. * E-mail: maling@brandeis.edu 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: S0024-3841 (00)00039-5 420 J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 I. The linking problem This paper addresses the so-called 'linking problem': the problem of discovering and explaining the regularities which govern the syntactic realization of a verb's arguments. What are the possible mappings between thematic roles, grammatical functions, and morphological case? What role does morphological case play in the grammar of natural languages? A common, if usually tacit, assumption in much of the literature is that morphological case directly reflects or encodes either grammat- ical functions (SUB J, OBJ, etc.) or thematic/semantic roles (agent, theme, experi- encer, goal, etc.). An unusually explicit formulation of this assumption is found in the following quote from Den Besten: (1) "... there seems to be a one-to-one relationship between nominative, dative, and accusative and Subject, Indirect Object, and Direct Object respectively" Den Besten (1989: 205). Such statements reflect the widespread assumption that there is a one-to-one map- ping between morphological case and grammatical functions (GFs). Similarly, in many languages we find quite systematic regularities concerning the relation between m-case and thematic role; for example, dative is cross-linguistically the case assigned to recipients, experiencers, and beneficiaries. Following Kiparsky (1987), I will use 'goal' as a cover term for this class. In this paper, I focus on dative case as a place where the mapping between the morphosyntax and semantics is often assumed to be particularly regular. In Romance languages, for example, it has been claimed that dative case is assigned to any ver- bal argument that is thematically a goal (Alsina, 1996: 175). We shall see, however, that the mapping is not so predictable, at least in Germanic. I show that not only are goal arguments not necessarily marked dative, but dative can be mapped to theme arguments as well as goals. Furthermore, even in the Germanic languages where the prototypical IO is dative, the IO is not always marked dative. For the purposes of this paper, I will use the traditional notion of IO, the argument which in all Germanic languages is the linearly first object in the double object construction and which by definition bears a goal-type theta role (usually recipient or benefactive), and hence is typically human. 1.1. Asymmetries between I0 and DO Before mining to the cross-linguistic data, I begin with a brief discussion of some of the arguments widely cited in the literature to distinguish between direct and indi- rect objects. One of the obvious differences between Romance and Germanic lan- guages concerns the syntax of three-place predicates like give. Ditransitive or double object verbs are a proper subset of the class of triadic predicates. Only the Germanic languages have a true double object construction with two NP objects. In the mod- em Romance languages, the recipient argument will be mapped onto a PP or a dative clitic; in the Germanic languages, the recipient will typically be mapped on to a J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 421 dative NP, traditionally labeled the Indirect Object. Possibly motivated by the desire to minimize the differences between languages, a number of linguists have suggested that the indirect object/goal-argument is realized as the object of a Preposition which may be phonologically null. Emonds (1985: §5.1; 1994: 617) argues that the mor- phological dative case on indirect object NPs and on NP complements to adjectives in German, Latin and classical Greek must be ascribed to the presence of an empty introductory P; the dative case-marking is formally represented as an index or feature P on the NP sister of this null P. In his discussion of three-argument verbs, Baker (1997) compares dative alternation with locative alternation, and argues that the dative alternation, unlike the locative alternation, is the result of syntactic movement. The theme argument is consistently generated as the (underlying) direct object, but the benefactive/goal argument is generated as an oblique internal argument, object of a possibly null preposition. Dative shift is "treated as an instance of Preposition Incorporation ... when the preposition is incorporated, it no longer can license Case on its object; therefore the goal must move to a position outside the inner VP to receive/check structural accusative Case .,. As a result of this movement, the goal comes to be before the theme and asymmetrically c-commands it" (Baker, 1997: 91). Baker's analysis is based on the claim that indirect objects behave like preposi- tional objects and unlike direct objects. Hudson (1992) uses the same claim to argue for the traditional assignment of grammatical functions to the two internal arguments of a double object verb. It is interesting that despite their very different theoretical approaches, Baker and Hudson give many of the same arguments. I enumerate Baker' s arguments here: (2) Six different syntactic asymmetries between I0 and DO (Baker, 1997) 1. Secondary Predication 2. Derived nominals 3. Synthetic Compounds 4. Movement (difficulty extracting the first object of a double object con- struction, or moving it rightward) 5. Quantifier Scope interactions 6. Unaccusative verbs (3) Adjectival secondary predication (Williams, 1980: 204; Baker, 1997: 90) a. I gave the meat to Mary raw. b. *I gave the meat to Mary hungry. c. I gave Mary the meat raw. d. *I gave Mary the meat hungry. [= Baker, 1997: 90, ex. 23d] (4) Derived nominals (Baker, 1997: 93, ex. 29) a. *Jim's giving of Mary (of) the book b. *the renting of the men (of) the house c. *his teaching of John (of) mathematics (5) Synthetic compounds (Baker, 1997: 94, ex. 35) a. secret-telling, book-reading b. *spy-telling, *child-reading 422 J. Mating / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 (6) Wh-movement and Heavy NP-shift (Baker, 1997: 92) a. *I gave t candy every child that came to the door. b. I gave to Johnny every piece of candy I could find. (7) Quantifier scope interactions (Baker 1997: 94, ex. 36) a. The teacher assigned one problem to every student. b. The teacher assigned one student every problem. (8) Unaccusative verbs (Baker, 1997: 95, ex. 40, 41) a. The rope dropped t down to John b. *John dropped t (down) the rope (ambiguous) (unambiguous) Both Baker and Hudson implicitly assume that direct objects of simple transitive (dyadic) verbs behave alike with respect to the various diagnostics they use to dis- tinguish the two internal arguments of ditransitive verbs: goal/IO versus theme/DO. I show here that this assumption is unfounded. Of the six asymmetries between IO and DO discussed by Baker, only two are specific to the double object construction: namely, movement and quantifier scope interaction, because they refer to the rela- tion between the two internal arguments. I argue that at least the first three diagnos- tics are sensitive not to grammatical function but to thematic role, since the effects show up with monotransitive verbs just as clearly. I consider two of these diagnos- tics here, synthetic compounds and secondary predication. 1.2. Synthetic compounds One of Baker's arguments is based on synthetic compounds. Observing first that a prepositional object cannot be compounded (cf. *relative-depending), he proposes to account for the impossibility of incorporating the IO of ditransitive verbs in terms of a null preposition. (9) a. *relative-depending (from depend on relatives) b. book-reading, gift-giving; letter-writing; c. *children-reading; *children-giving; *friend-writing incorporated object of P incorporated DO incorporated IO On the basis of these contrasts, Baker concludes that "Goal role is necessarily assigned by a preposition and Ps cannot appear in compounds" (Baker, 1997: 106). However, the facts concerning synthetic compounds are far more complicated. First, there are mysterious contrasts involving direct objects which presumably bear the same thematic role but differ in some other way. (10) a. Poetry-reading is not popular. b, *Shakespeare-reading is required of all high school students. More significantly, simple transitive verbs do not all behave alike. The direct objects of dyadic verbs like help, invite, reach, telephone, thank, visit cannot appear in syn- thetic compounds any more than the indirect objects of ditransitive verbs can. J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 423 (11) a. b. c. d. e. f. g. *Station-reaching on time is our goal. *Goal-reaching can be difficult. *Relative-visiting can be boring. *Dentist-visiting is no fun. *Host-thanking is common courtesy. *Friend-phoning after midnight makes parents angry. *Guest-inviting for the wedding took forever. These are all verbs whose objects are often described as bearing the theta role goal rather than theme. The fact that the goal object of a dyadic transitive verb behaves like the IO, and unlike the DO, of a ditransitive verb shows that contrasts like those in (9) cannot be used as a diagnostic for grammatical function, as Hudson (1992) assumes. And unless one is willing to analyze the direct objects of these simple tran- sitive verbs as (underlyingly) the objects of a null preposition, the constrasts also suggest the existence of a thematic restriction against goal arguments occurring in such compounds. 1.3. Adjectival secondary predicates Another of Baker's arguments is based on adjectival secondary predicates. A well-known descriptive generalization is that depictive and resultative APs can be predicated of a direct object but not the object of a P, as illustrated by the contrasts shown in (3); this restriction is standardly attributed to a c-command condition on secondary predication. 1 Williams (I980) observed a further restriction for dative verbs: a secondary predicate cannot be predicated of the goal argument of a ditran- sitive verb, even when it is not expressed as the object of to. This restriction is some- times referred to as the Theme Condition (Anderson, 1976; Rapoport, 1991, 1993). Baker makes the following claim: (12) "Indeed, (23d) [*I gave Mary the meat hungry] is the only situation in which an AP cannot be predicated of a bare NP that is inside VP" (Baker, 1997: 90) But this is not a descriptively accurate generalization. Consider the examples below which involve direct objects of simple two-place predicates. The object-host reading is unavailable. 2 The predicative AP would normally be understood as mod- ifying the subject NP, but this reading has been ruled out by including an attribu- tive modifier e.g. sober, which conflicts with the meaning of the depictive AP, e.g. drunk. (13) a. *The sober dean helped the student to his room drunk b. *The only healthy nurse visited the patient at home sick This structural condition on predication is not universal. As discussed in Section 4, virtually any NP, including prepositional objects, can host a secondary predicate in Icelandic. ~- The intended object reading may be marginally available if separated by a strong enough pause. 424 J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 c. *The elegantly-dressed CEO invited the animal rights protestors inside stark-naked. d. *The sober dean telephoned the student at home drunk. Just like the IO of a ditransitive verb, the direct object of these two-argument verbs cannot host a predicative AP. Conversely, it is sometimes possible to predicate a depictive AP of a NP which is an indirect object or object of a P, which are widely assumed not to c-command the secondary predicate. 3 (14) a. The brain surgeon had to operate on the patient wide-awake. b. The perverted orderly liked to look at female patients nude. c. Victorian doctors preferred to give their female patients a physical exam fully-dressed d. The nurse gave the patient his medication still-groggy~half-asleep. The picture is obviously far more complex than one would assume from reading Baker or Hudson. 1.4. Theoretical issues What are the implications of these contrasts for syntactic theory, in particular, for the Uniformity of Theta Assignment Hypothesis (UTAH)? ( 15 ) The Uniformity of Theta Assignment Hypothesis (UTAH) a. "Identical thematic relationships between items are represented by identical structural relationships between those items at the level of D-structure." (Baker, 1988: 46) b. "Arguments bearing similar thematic roles are expressed in similar initial structural positions both within and across languages ... IT]he alternations in the realization of arguments of a predicate that one does find are either the result of different conceptualizations of the event, or the result of syntactic movement processes" (Baker, 1997: 104-105) Baker suggests that goals always receive their theta-role from a (possibly null) preposition. The logical consequence of this is clear: in accordance with UTAH, the objects of simple transitive verbs like help, invite, thank, telephone, visit must also be (underlyingly) the objects of a null preposition. Not all linguists will find this to be an acceptable level of abstraction. An alternative is that the restrictions on synthetic compounds and nominalizations are thematic rather than configurational. If this suggestion is correct, the observed contrasts provide evidence that lexical rules need to refer to the content of theta-roles, 3 See also Whelpton (1995) for similar examples of control of Purpose clauses where the controller is either an indxrect object or is headed by a preposition. J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 425 and not just their relative position in a verb's them-grid (contra much recent work), since a two-place predicate whose internal argument is a theme behaves differently from one whose internal argument is a goal argument. The problem, of course, is whether we can accurately identify the thematic role that a given verbal argument bears. We cannot simply rely on our intuitions about the difference between themes and goals. I assume that theme is defined as the argument that undergoes the action or motion or change of state described by the predicate. (16) The theme is the entity which undergoes the (physical) change of state or loca- tion It is not straightforward to apply such definitions to a given verbal argument. Unfortunately, linguistic theory still awaits a full Lexical Conceptual Structure (LCS) analysis of verbs; so in the meantime, we will have to rely on other syntactic tests to support these intuitions. The difference between theme and goal arguments is reflected in English nominalizations in at least two ways: (i) in the choice of prepo- sition, and (ii) for deverbal process nominals, in the interpretation of adnominal gen- itives as corresponding to the verb's subject or object. Some English examples are given in (17)-(18): (17) Our help/thanks to/*of the hostess went unacknowledged. (Wasow, 1977: 388) (18) a. the student's rescue (ambiguous: agent or theme) b. the student's help (unambiguous: agent only/*benefactive goal) The relevant generalizations are as follows. First, themes but not goals can be marked with the case-assigning preposition of, as illustrated in (17). Second, themes but not goals can be linked to the adnominal genitive position when the head N is a deverbal process nominal, as shown in (18). Wasow (1977: 338) expresses the difference in terms of grammatical functions, e.g. the verbs help and thank are said to take 'indirect objects' as their objects. In his comments on Wasow's paper, Anderson (1977) interprets the distinction instead as one of thematic role (goal vs. theme). Since the objects of transitive verbs do not all behave alike, it follows that Theme cannot be treated as the default theta-role on verbal objects. Roeper (1993) assumes that the object of the verb help is a Theme, and hence the verb has an [AG,TH] argu- ment structure. This assumption is made explicit in his representation of the passive: (19) Johnvn was help +ed by BilIA~ [AG,TH] (Roeper, 1993: 189, ex. 15) Roeper observes that the verb's object is 'unprojectable', in that the deverbal nomi- nal help does not allow the object to be expressed as either an of-phrase or a prever- bal genitive; note that in the NPs in (20a), John can only correspond to the subject argument of the corresponding verb: 426 J. Maling / Lingua lll (2001) 419-464 (20) a. the help of John/John's help (John = subject, ~ object) (Roeper, 1993: 189, ex. 16b) b. John's defeat; John's rescue; John's murder (John = subject or object) Because he fails to consider thematic role, Roeper mistakenly attributes the unpro- jectability of the object of help to zero-affixation, and goes on to develop an account in which the zero-affix blocks the percolation of the internal argument. But this hypothesis fails to account for the contrast between help and the many zero-affix deverbal nominals (including rescue, defeat and murder) that do allow expression of the object as an objective genitive. Like the analyses of Fagan and Holmberg and Platzack discussed below, this example clearly illustrates the danger of the wide- spread tendency to treat theme as the default theta-role on objects. 1.5. The role of morphological case With this discussion of English as background, we can now turn to the questions posed at the beginning of this paper. To what extent does morphological case serve to encode either grammatical function or thematic role? How can we tease apart these grammatical notions? How does dative, the prototypical case of the indirect object, fit into the picture? For the purposes of discussion, I will ignore the possibil- ity of lexical case-marking other than dative. Under this simplified picture, dative and accusative are the only possible morphological cases on verbal objects. The pro- totypical mappings between morphological case, grammatical functions and the- matic role are shown in the first two lines of Table 1. The remaining logically pos- sible combinations are shown in lines 3--6. Table 1 The linking problem GF m-case 0-role 1 Direct Object accusative theme 2 Indirect Object dative goal 3 Indirect Object accusative goal 4 Direct Object dative theme 5 Direct Object accusative goal 6 Direct Object dative goal Recall that for the purposes of this paper, I am using the traditional notion of IO, which by definition bears a goal-type theta role, rather than the linearly first object which might be considered the direct object by the syntactic criterion of passiviza- tion. The traditional semantic definition of the term IO makes the distinction between grammatical function and thematic role redundant For this reason, Table 1 has only six rows rather than the expected eight, since by definition, the theme argu- ment of double object verbs will never be assigned to the function 'indirect object'. For two-argument verbs, however, there are four possible mappings between m-case j. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 427 and thematic role. For a sketch of the case-marking on verbal objects in Icelandic, see Appendix A. The remainder of this paper is divided into two sections. Section 2 is about the cor- relation between dative case and the GF 'Indirect Object'. I look at the co-occurrence restrictions on both accusative and dative objects, and argue that morphological case is not the constraining factor. Section 3 is concerned with the correlation between dative case and thematic role. Dative is, of course, not only the prototypical case on indirect objects, but cross-linguistically the case most likely to occur on the goal-like objects of verbs like help, thank, invite, visit, etc. I look at a number of examples in the morpho-syntax of Germanic languages where appeal has been made to the pres- ence of lexical case-marking on verbal arguments in order to account for observed restrictions. In each case, examination of further data shows that lexical case does not play a role in restricting lexical rules. The evidence from adnominal genitives, middle formation and secondary predication shows that accusative goals behave in most respects just like dative goals. Finally, in Section 4, I briefly discuss two con- structions where the presence of m- case does seem to be the constraining factor. 2. The mapping between dative and the GF indirect object As noted earlier, there is a widespread assumption that there is a one-to-one map- ping between morphological case and GFs. While NOM subjects, ACC objects and DAT indirect objects are surely the unmarked state of affairs cross-linguistically, they are not the only possibilities. As Den Besten himself notes, exceptions to this general pattern must be allowed for verbs which govern a nonstandard case on an object. It has traditionally been assumed that the grammatical subject is always NOM, and the nominative NP (other than a predicate nominal) is necessarily the grammatical SUB J; work on Icelandic and other languages has demonstrated convincingly the existence of both non-nominative subjects and nominative objects (see Zaenen et al., 1985, inter alia). It is well-known that lexical (a.k.a. inherent or quirky) case may block the application of syntactic rules which effect changes in grammatical function. For example, lexically case-marked NPs cannot undergo passive in either German and Russian, in the sense that they cannot become the surface grammatical subjects of passive verbs (Babby, 1980; Freidin and Sprouse, 1991). In effect, in these languages, m-case appears to block the mapping of a lexically case-marked NP to the grammat- ical functions of SUBJ and DO. As is well known, no such constraint exists in cer- tain other languages, including at least one Germanic language, namely Icelandic. 4 Less often recognized is the fact that indirect objects are not necessarily dative. 4 Even in Icelandic, m-case seems to play a minor role in passive. Lexical case on the theme of a ditransitive verb prevents that argument from undergoing passive in the double object use when the goal argument is realized as a NP, not a PP (Zaenen et al., 1985; Sprouse, 1996). The situation is actually more complicated than presented in the literature because of benefactive NDA verbs like auSvelda 'to make easier', where the accusative object does not readily passivize. By benefactive, I mean an argu- ment which can be paraphrased as a for-phrase. 428 J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 One goal of the theory of abstract Case is to account for the distribution of argu- ment NPs. It is widely assumed that Case theory makes available two structural Cases, NOM and ACC, which can each be assigned to at most one NP per clause. Similarly, for languages with double object constructions, it is often assumed that there is a single DAT case available, which is assigned to the IO. This analysis works well for German, a language for which it is essentially correct that there can be at most one ACC object and at most one DAT object 5 per clause (Czepluch, 1982; Wegener, 1991). This descriptive generalization is not a constraint on mor- phological case per se; nonarguments, including adverbial adjuncts and nonsubcate- gorized 'free datives' (see below) must be excluded. Structural case must be distin- guished from the semantic case associated with various adverbials. As Wegener (1991 : 73) notes, adverbial accusative makes it possible to have as many or four or five accusative NPs in a single clause (the example in (21a) contains one of the very few verbs which govern two accusative objects). Toman (1987: 23f) notes that adverbial accusative is available in non-Case positions, e.g. as complement to a noun. These possibilities are illustrated in (21): (21) a. Er hat vorigen Monat jeden Abend he has last-ACC month each evening-A W6rter abgefragt. words-A quizzed b. die Widmung letzten Monat the dedication last-ACC month. eine Stunde seinen Sohn one hour-A his son-A Many linguists have independently suggested that there is a single Spec,VP posi- tion where IOs are generated; this position is thematically restricted to 'goal-like' arguments (experiencers, recipients, benefactives). 6 Depending on the analysis and/or the language, this specifier position may or may not be associated with (struc- tural) dative case (cf. Wegener, 1991; Holmberg and Platzack, 1995: 204). Dative on verbal arguments has usually been considered a lexically-assigned case, but Wegener (1991) gives two sorts of arguments in support of the claim that dative in German is actually a structural case: (i) case alternations, e.g bekommen or Recipi- ent passives (see Reis, 1985), and (ii) co-occurrence restrictions. 7 Wegener observes that in many ways, dative case behaves just like structural accusative. For example, either a dative or recipient argument may become the nominative subject of the bekommen passive, with lack of case-preservation, just as an accusative object becomes the nominative subject of the standard passive with auxiliary sein or werden. In this paper I will discuss only the argument involving co-occurrence restrictions. 5 This does not hold for Icelandic, which has verbs taking two dative objects (see Appendix A). 6 Recall that I am using 'goal' as a cover term for this class (following Kiparsky, 1987) rather than 'experiencer', the term used by Holmberg and Platzack (1995). 7 See Vogel and Steinbach (1998) for arguments against treating dative as a structural case in German. J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 429 2.1. Co-occurrence restrictions on (structural) accusative in German It has been noted several times in the literature that with a very few diachronic exceptions, German has no double accusative ditransitives (Czepluch, 1982). Wegener observes a number of co-occurrence restrictions for verbal arguments bear- ing structural accusative, which she interprets as indicating that a verb can assign at most one ACC case to argument NPs. She begins by noting that German lacks a Whole-part (inalienable possession) construction: (22) a. b. C. d. e, Er packte das Kind. he grabbed the child-ACC Er packte seinen Arm. he grabbed his arm-ACC *Er packte das Kind seinen Arm. he grabbed the child-ACC his arm-ACC Er packte das Kind am Arm. 'He grabbed the child by the ann.' Er packte [den Arm des Kindes]. 'He grabbed the child's arm.' Possessor Body-Part The reader might be wondering why we should expect a sentence like (c) to be grammatical, given that the verb 'grab' is a simple two-place predicate taking a sin- gle object. But in many languages, including Korean, which has multiple accusative constructions of various kinds including ditransitive verbs, such sentences are fine, and indeed, it is in principle possible to have an unlimited number of accusative NPs (Kim, 1990: 289f.): (23) a. b. Yumi-ka kay-eykey phal-ul oynccok-ul kkuth-ul Yumi-N dog-DAT arm-ACC leftside-ACC end-ACC mul-li-ess-ta. bite-Pass-Pst-Ind (Korean, Kim, 1990: 289f.). 'Yumi was bitten by the dog on the end of her left arm.' Cheli-ka Mary-lul panci-lul senmul-ul ha-yess-ta. Cheli-Nom Mary-ACC ring-ACC gift-ACC do-Pst-Ind 'Cheli presented Mary with a ring.' (Maling and Kim, 1992: 53) Whatever the mechanism for this might be, Korean differs from German, then, in the ability of structural accusative to spread to as many internal argument NP's as there may be in the syntax. Wegener's second argument that there can be at most one accusative case on argument NP's in German comes from certain verbs of creation, which can take either an 'affected' object or an 'effected' object. This is illustrated by the following examples (Wegener, 1991: 73, ex. 9a-c): (24) a. Sie bindet die Blumen (zu einem Kranz). 'Affected object' she ties the flowers-ACC (into a crown/wreath) 430 J. Mating / Lmgua 111 (2001) 419--464 b. Sie bindet (aus den Blumen) einen Kranz. she ties (out.of the flowers) a-ACC crown c. *Sie bindet die Blumen einen Kranz 'Effected object' The generalization is that where a given verb can take either an 'effected' or an 'affected' accusative object, they cannot co-occur in the same clause as two accusative objects. Wegener attributes this co-occurrence restriction to the hypothe- sis that a verb can assign only a single structural accusative in German. Once again, cross-linguistic evidence suggests that these are not in fact reflexes of the same Case-assigning mechanism, since this co-occurrence restriction holds for at least some speakers of Korean, where as we have seen, the case resources of the language do allow for more than one accusative argument NP per clause. Although some speakers do accept such sentences, 8 many do not allow both the 'effected' or and 'affected' object to be marked accusative. (25) a. b. c. (26) a. b. c. Yumi-nun kkoch-ul yekk-ess-ta. Yumi-TOP flower-ACC tie-Pst-Ind Yumi-nun hwahwan-ul yekk-ess-ta. Yumi-TOP wreath-ACC tie-Pst-Ind %Yumi-nun kkoch-ul hwahwan-ul yekk-ess-ta. Yumi-nun cangcak-ul ciphi-ess-ta. Yumi-TOP logs-ACC burn-Pst-Ind Yumi-nun motakpul-ul ciphi-ess-ta. Yumi-TOP(small)campfire-ACC burned %Yumi-nun cangcak-ul motakpul-ul ciphi-ess-ta. lit: Yumi burned logs a campfire 'Yumi burned the logs down to a campfire.' (Korean) Thus, the limits on the Case-assigning properties of the verb in a given language cannot be the entire explanation for the co-occurrence restrictions on accusative objects noted by Wegener. 2.2. Co-occurrence restrictions on dative in German Wegener shows that similar co-occurrence restrictions hold for dative case. The German verb stehlen 'steal' can take either a dative beneficiary or a dative source, but not both together, as illustrated in (27): (27) a. Er stiehlt dem Juwelier einen Ring. he steals the-DAT jeweler a-ACC ring 'He steals a ring from the jeweler.' SOURCE.oAT TH.Acc According to Soowon Kiln (p.c.), wreath is felt to be a kind of small clause complement '... to make a wreath'. The first NP (the affected object) can also appear with instntmental case. There is the same slight difference in meaning that holds for the spray~load altemauon in English: the ACC ACC V pat- tern has a holistic interpretation, whereas INST ACC V pattern has a partial reading. J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 431 b. C. Er stiehlt seiner Freundin einen Ring. he steals his-DAT friend a-ACC ring 'He steals a ring for his girlfriend.' *Er stiehlt seiner Freundin dem Juwelier einen Ring. Er stiehlt seiner Freundin beim Juwelier einen Ring. Er stiehlt ftir seine Freundin dem Juwelier einen Ring. PP BEN_DAT TH.Acc BEN SOURCE THEME *DAT DAT ACC DAT PP ACC DAT ACC Wegener cites vermieten 'to rent' as another verb which can take either a dative ben- eficiary or a dative goal, but not both together, but many speakers find the benefac- tive reading of the dative impossible to get with this verb. Another example of the q same son is the verb schreiben 'to write': (28) a. Bitte, schreib dem Vorsitzenden einen Brief! GOAL please write the-DAT chairman a-ACC letter b. Bitte, schreib deinem Studenten eine Empfehlung! BEN please write your-DAT student a-ACC letter.of.recommendation c. *Bitte, schreib deinem Smdenten dem Vorsitzenden einen Brief! Wegener argues that the co-occurrence restrictions follow from the hypothesis that ACC and DAT are both structural cases in German, and that a verb can assign at most one ACC and one DAT. Exactly the same argument could be made for English. As illustrated in (29), the 'dative' me can have either a benefactive reading ('for me/on my behalf'), or a recip- ient/goal reading ('to me'), but the two cannot co-occur in the same clause unless one of them is realized as a PP. (29) a. b. C. Please write me a letter of recommendation. BEN TH 'on my behalf' Please write the chairman a letter. GOAL TH 'to the chairman' *Please write me the chairman a letter of recommendation. Since English shows the same co-occurrence restriction as German, some linguists might want to argue that the IO bears an abstract dative Case. Wegener interprets this co-occurrence restriction as evidence that German has available a single dative case, which is assigned structurally to a Specifier position. Whatever the correct account is, the descriptive generalization is that in a given clause, only one goal-like argument can be realized as a bare NP; any others must be realized as PPs. The availability of m-case seems to provide a filter on the morphosyntactic real- ization of argument structure, such that in a language like German, there can be only one accusative object per clause, and only one dative object per clause. As noted above, there is no surface constraint against two dative NPs, since (as observed by both Wegener, 1991; Vogel and Steinbach, 1998), a benefactive or malefactive dative can co-occur with dative object. The following examples are from Vogel and Steinbach (1998: 77, ex. 36b-d). 432 J. Maling I Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 (30) a. Dem Peter habe ich gestern seinem Auto einen the Peter-DAT have I yesterday his car-DAT a neuen Motor eingebaut. new engine-ACC built-in 'Yesterday I put a new engine into his car for Peter.' b. Helf mir mal deinem Vater in der Kiiche. help me-DAT a.minute your father in the kitchen 'Go help your father in the kitchen for a minute for me.' c. Der David hat mir der Claudia schon zuviel the David has me-DAT the Claudia-DAT already too.many Geschenke gegeben. gifts-ACC given 'I think David has already given Claudia too many presents.' This extra dative is most acceptable if it is a 1 st or 2nd person pronoun located at the left edge of the VP; it is interpreted as a beneficiary or person adversely affected by the event described in the sentence. Such datives have been called either the 'free dative' or the ethical dative. I assume that this dative is not subcategorized for by the verb. As an adjunct rather than an argument, it is not a grammatical object, and hence not a counterexample to the descriptive generalization that German allows at most one dative object per clause. As attractive as the case-theoretic account is, cross-linguistic evidence suggests that the restrictions on dative are entirely different from the restrictions on accusative. Evidence from Icelandic indicates that dative case per se is not to blame, since this co-occurrence restriction is independent of the morphological case marking on the IO. Consider the verb bigja 'to ask'. When used as a ditransitive, bigja occurs in two different case frames: NAG and NDG. The theme argument is always marked genitive; accusative case marks the goal of the speech act, i.e. the person asked, while dative marks a beneficiary, the person for whose benefit the request is made. (3 !) a. J6n bag [syni sfnum] [blessunar gugs] BEN_DA T TH_GE N Jon asked his son-D God's blessing-G 'Jon asked God's blessing for his son.' b. J6n bag [gug] [blessunar] [f-yrir son sinn] GOAL Ac c TH.GE N BEN.pp Jon asked God-A blessing-G for his son 'J6n asked God for his blessing for his son.' c. *J6n ba8 [guS] [syni sfnum] [blessunar] *GOAL_Ac c BEN_DAT TH_GEN d. **J6n ba8 [syni sfnum] [guS] [blessunar] **BEN_oA T GOAL_Ac c TH_GE N However, even though the m-case associated with these two thematic roles differs, there can still be at most two NP objects in a clause. As shown by the ungrammaticality of (31c,d), it is impossible to combine an accusative and dative IO in the same clause; in order to express all three arguments, the beneficiary must the realized as a pp.9 9 Haugan (1988: 126) provides two examples from Old Norse of this verb with three nominal internal arguments, one of them a dative reflexive benefactive. (The first example is from Gunnlaugs saga orm- stungu 1181; the second is from Egils saga Skalla-Grfmssonar 375.) J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 433 Note that the restriction cannot be accounted for by disallowing more than one lexi- cally case-marked argument per clause, since many Icelandic ditransitive verbs gov- ern two lexically-case marked objects (see Appendix A). Even more compelling is the fact that Korean exhibits the same co-occurrence restriction on dative arguments as German, even though it allows an unlimited num- ber of accusative NP's. As iUustated in (32), dative case can mark a number of dif- ferent thematic roles in Korean, depending on the verb (Suh, 1996: 454; Jun, 1998). (32) a. Elun-tul-i ai-tul-eykey senmul-ul cwu-ess-ta. Recipient adult-pl-NOM child-pl-DAT gift-ACC give-Pst-Ind 'Adults gave children gifts.' b. Ku sonyen-un tongmu-eykey phyenci-lul ssu-ess-ta. Goal the boy-TOP friend-DAT letter-ACC write-Pst-Ind 'The boy wrote (his) friend a letter.' c. Chinkwu-ka na-eykey ku muncey-lul malha-yess-ta. Hearer friend-NOM me-DAT the problem-ACC talked '(My) friend talked to me about the problem.' d. Na-nun Tom-eykey cenyek-ul sa-(a)ss-ta. Beneficiary I-TOP Tom-DAT dinner-ACC bought 'I bought Tom dinner.' e. Na-nun noin-eykey panci-lul sa-(a)ss-ta. Source I-TOP old.man-DAT ring-ACC bought 'I bought a ring from an old man.' f. Na-nun ku-eykey panci-lul ppayas-ass-ta. Source I-TOP him-DAT ring-ACC rob-Pst-Ind 'I robbed him of a ring.' It is possible to have two or more dative NP's in a single clause if the NPs are related by inalienable possession: 10 (33) a. Nay-ka I-NOM b. Nay-ka I-NOM Yumi-eykey ima-ey kissuha-yess-ta. Yumi-DAT forehead-DAT kiss-Pst-Ind (Kim, 1989: 462) Yumi-eykey phal-ey cwusa-lul noh-ass-ta. Yumi-DAT arm-DAT shot-ACC give-Pst-Ind (Maling and Kim, 1992: 43) (i) Um vod~5 ba~ Gunnlaugur konunginn s~r orlofs til brottferSar. in the.spring asked Gunnlang-N the.king-A REFL-D permission-G to departure 'In the spring, Gunnlang asked the king for permission to go away.' (ii) En er veturinn lei8 af og sumar kom la~i ba/5 BfirSur s~r orlofs konung a~5 fara a~5 vitja r~iSs laess er honum haf6i beiti8 veri~5 hi~5 fyrra sumar. 'But when winter passed and summer came, then asked Bar~Sur-N REFL-D permission-G king-A to go look into the marriage which he had been promised the summer before.' These would be impossible in modem Icelandic. It is surely no accident that the benefactive dative is a reflexive pronoun, which is known not to act as Object in some languages (Sells et al., 1987). l0 Since -ey and -eykey are in complementary distribution in Korean, depending on the animacy of the NP, they are generally assumed to be allomorphs of a single morpheme, glossed here as dative. 434 J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 However, it is impossible to have two dative NP's bearing different thematic roles. (34) a. *Na-nun noin-eykey anay-eykey panci-lul sa-cwu-ess-ta. I-TOP old.man-DAT wife-DAT ring-ACC buy-Pst-Ind intended: 'I bought a ring from an old man for my wife.' b. *Ku-nun ku-uy yecachinkwu-eykey poseksang-eykey. he-TOP his girl-friend-DAT jeweler-DAT panci-lul ppayas-ass-ta ring-ACC rob-Pst-Ind intended: 'He stole a ring from the jeweler for his girlfriend' As in Icelandic, this co-occurrence restriction can be shown to be independent of the morphological case on the recipient. Some ditransitive verbs in Korean allow the IO to be marked accusative as well as dative. (35) a. Na-nun anay-lul panci-lul sa-cwu-ess-ta. I-TOP wife-ACC ring-ACC buy-Pst-Ind b. %Ku-nun na-lul cikap-ul ppayas-ass-ta. he-TOP me-ACC wallet-ACC rob-Pst-Ind Choosing this option does not, however, make it possible for the added benefactive or source to be marked dative. Rather, a more semantically specific postposition must be used: (36) a. b. (37) a. b. *Na-nun noin-eykey anay-lul panci-lul sa-cwu-ess-ta. 1-TOP old.man-DAT wife-ACC ring-ACC buy-Pst-Ind *Ku-nun anay-eykey na-lul cikap-ul ppayas-ass-ta. he-TOP wife-DAT me-ACC wallet-ACC rob-Pst-Ind 'He robbed me of my wallet for his wife.' Na-nun noin-eykeyse anay-eykey/lul panci-lul sa-cwu-ess-ta. I-TOP old.man-SOURCE wife-DAT/ACC ring-ACC buy-Pst-Ind 'He bought a ring for his wife from the old man.' Ku-nun anay-lulwihay na-eykey/%lul cikap-ul ppayas-ass-ta. he-TOP wife-BEN me-DAT/ACC wallet-ACC rob-Pst-Ind 'He stole my wallet/purse for his wife.' Once again, we see that dative case is not to blame. How, then, are these co- occurrence restrictions to be explained? I suggest that they can best be accounted for in terms of functional uniqueness. For three-argument verbs, the various Goal-like arguments may be realized either as the object of a semantically appropriate prepo- sition, or (in some languages) as a bare case-marked NP; the choice between PP or NP, and if an NP, the m-case it bears (what Baker (1997: 86) calls 'semantic Case marker'), is subject to strict subcategorization by the verb. If the verb selects to real- ize a goal argument as an NP, that argument must be assigned to a grammatical func- tion such as IO or OBJ2 (other than OBL). By functional uniqueness, only one NP J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 435 can be mapped to this function. Alternatively, one could say that such arguments compete for a single syntactic slot, a unique functional projection, Agr-IO. Whichever theoretical approach one chooses, dative case turns out not to be the con- straining factor. 3. The mapping between m-case and thematic roles In Section 2, I provided evidence that the mapping between grammatical func- tions and m-case is not one-to-one. Let us now turn to the relationship between mor- phological case and thematic roles. In this section, I discuss the constraints on mid- dle formation, adnominal genitives to deverbal nominalizations, and the licensing of depictive predicates. The relevance of thematic roles for various kinds of (lexical) rules has been pointed out by various linguists (see e.g. Hale and Keyser (1987) on middles, Tenny (1992) on nominalizations, Rapoport (1993) on depictive predi- cates). However, as noted earlier, there is a widespread tendency to ignore this level of grammatical representation, and instead treat Theme as the default theta-role on direct objects. This oversight has led to false claims about the nature of restrictions on various rules. One example is Middle Formation in German (Fagan, 1992). 3.1. Middle formation What about lexical rules? Can lexical case have the same blocking effect on the externalization of a verb's internal argument in the lexicon that it can have on NP- movement in the syntax? In her detailed study of middle constructions in German, Fagan (1992) argues that Middle Formation (MF) is a lexical rule which externalizes the direct theta-role, and that the rule is constrained by both syntactic and semantic/ aspectual constraints, as summarized in (38). (38) Conditions on Middle Formation in German (Fagan, 1992: Ch. 5, Table 2) a. V does not assign lexical case; b. V is not an achievement or state; c. V is not ditransitive. The conditions in (38) are intended to limit the class of verbs which are eligible for Middle Formation in German. That there is some aspectual condition on MF is fairly uncontroversial, although according to Steinbach (1998:16), the condition in (b) is too restrictive; he argues that only individual-level predicates are excluded. The restrictions in (a) and (c), however, seem to be curious, language-particular con- straints. Middle Formation in English is shown to be subject to the same conditions except for the Lexical Case Constraint in (a). ti Fagan sensibly assumes that alan- ~ Fagan (1992: 167) asks whether the constraint in (a) is a general constraint on externalization rather than a construction-specific constraint, but based on let-middles, she concludes that the constraint is in fact construction-specific. 436 J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 guage like English which lacks morphological case-marking also lacks lexical case, even abstractly. I argue here that this constraint is unnecessary even for German. Dative is not to blame, since independently motivated semantic and aspectual conditions (Fagan, 1992: Ch. 3) will rule out middies of verbs which happen to assign lexical case to their objects in German. Moreover, I show that in Icelandic many verbs which assign dative case form middles. Thus in neither language is it necessary to assume that lex- ical case blocks Middle Formation. Fagan cites only one verb, helfen 'to help', in support of her claim that lexical case blocks Middle Formation in German. She observes that there is a contrast between waschen 'to wash', which forms a good middle, and helfen, which does not: (39) a. Der Stoff wascht sich gut. the fabric(N) washes REFL well 'The fabric launders well.' b. *Er hilft sich schwer. he-NOM helps REFL hard 'He's difficult to help.' c. *He helps with difficulty. (Fagan, 1992: 164, 54b) (Fagan, 1992: 164, 55b) Steinbach (1998: 17, 84) also observes that middle formation is always ungrammat- ical with verbs that select dative case on their sole object. More precisely, they can- not form personal middles; there is an impersonal middle with expletive subject es, shown in (40b)). (40) a. b. *Der Rektor widerspricht sich leicht. the dean-N contradicts REFL easily Dem Rektor widerspricht sich's leicht. the dean-D contradicts REFL it easily (Steinbach, 1998: 84, 66a) (Steinbach, 1998: 85, 66b) Steinbach accounts for failure of dative objects to undergo MF in terms of a condi- tion on chain formation. He proposes that dative objects are A-bar elements in syn- tax; since A-chains are a necessary prerequisite for MF in German, i.e. MF is lim- ited to A-positions, which by hypothesis exclude lexically case-marked arguments. In effect, the presence of lexical case-marking blocks the mapping of an argument to the SUBJ and OBJ functions. Fagan (1992: 165, ex. 57a,b) gives the following lexical representations for the verbs 'wash' and 'help': (41) a. waschen (agent, patient) b. helfen (agent, patientlex,caZcase) These representations are based on the assumption that the only thing which distin- guishes waschen from helfen is the presence or absence of lexical case marking on the internal argument. "The direct 0-role of waschen differs from the direct 0-role of J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 437 helfen in that it is associated with a direct argument that receives structural case rather than lexical case" (Fagan, 1992: 164). Holmberg and Platzack (1995: 37) make essentially the same assumption about the Icelandic counterpart hj61pa, namely that this verb assigns lexical case to a theme. Both Fagan and Steinbach make crucial use of lexical case-marking. Note, how- ever, that the English middle *He helps with difficul~ is just as ungrammatical as its German counterpart, despite the lack of lexical case in English. This suggests that the failure of help to undergo Middle Formation might better be attributed to other factors. What about the restriction in (38c) against ditransitives? As has often been observed, only the direct object of a ditransitive verb can become the subject of the corresponding middle, and never the indirect object. (42) a. Ich habe einem Linguisten ein Buch verkaufl. 'I sold a linguist-DAT a book-ACC.' b. *Ein Linguist verkauft sich leicht Biicher. 'A linguist sells books easily.' c. Biicher verkaufen sich leicht an einen Linguisten. Einem Linguisten verkaufen sich Biicher leicht. 'Books sell easily to a linguist.' Most IOs in German are marked dative, and externalization of these dative IOs would already be blocked by the lexical case constraint in (38a). Fagan adds this restriction in order to block externalization of the IO argument even when it doesn't bear lexical case; this is needed because of the few ditransitive verbs like lehren 'to teach' which take ACC on the indirect object as well as the direct object, at least in the standard written language) 2 As Fagan notes, the verb lehren 'to teach' fails to form a middle, as shown in (43b). Another example is given in (44) using the verb abfragen 'to test, quiz'. (43) a. Er lehrt die Schiiler die deutsche Sprache. (Fagan, 1992: 165, 59a) he teaches the pupils-ACC the German language-ACC b. *Diese Schiiler lehren sich (diese Sprache) schwer. these pupils-NOM teach REFL this language hard 'These pupils don't teach (this language) easily.' (Fagan, 1992: 165, 59b) c, *Kinder lehren sich Fremdsprachen leicht 'Children teach foreign languages easily.' (Maling, 1993) (44) a. Der Lehrer hat den Schiller die unregelmaBigen Verben abgefragt. the teacher has the student-A the irregular verbs-A tested b. *Schiiler fragen sich die unregelmaBigen Verben schwer ab. 'Students don't test easily on irregular verbs.' ~-' This argument is complicated by the fact that for most speakers, this verb no longer takes the pre- scriptive ACC ACC case frame, but has assimilated to the productive DAT ACC case frame for ditran- sitive verbs. See Steinbach (1998: 69, fn. 33, 185). 438 J. Mahng /Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 The impossibility of MF in these examples suggests that once again, dative case is not to blame for the failure of indirect objects generally to become the nominative subjects of middles. With this in mind, consider two-place predicates. A telling fact is that certain tran- sitive verbs which take accusative objects also fail to undergo MF. The sentences in (45) contain the verb bitten 'to ask', which governs accusative case on the 'askee' = the goal of the speech act. This accusative object does not undergo MF, as illustrated in (45b). The same is true of many other monotransitive verbs, including anrufen 'to appeal to, to phone', bedienen 'serve', einladen 'invite', treffen 'meet', unterrichten 'to instruct', and unterstiitzen 'support', all of which govern accusative case on their objects. (Singular subjects have been chosen to rule out a reciprocal interpretation.) Note that these examples sound just as odd in English as they do in German. (45) a. b. (46) a. b. C. d. e. f. g. h. Der Angeklagte bittet den Richter um Gnade. the defendant asks the judge-A for mercy *DerRichter bittet sich schwer um Gnade. the judge asks REFL hard for mercy Intended: 'The judge can't easily be asked for mercy.' *Das Kind l~idt sich leicht auf Parties ein. 'The child invites easily to parties.' *Der Pr~isident ruft sich schwer an. 'The president doesn't telephone easily.' *GroBmutter besucht sich leicht. 'Grandmother visits easily.' *Der KOnig bediente sich schwer. 'The king didn't serve easily.' *Eine Muslimin trifft sich schwer. 'A moslem woman doesn't meet easily. '73 *Dieser Prasident greift sich schwer an. ~This president doesn't attack easily.' *Dieser Patient unterrichtet sich leicht tiber die Therapie. 'This patient instructs easily about the therapy.' *Diese Methoden untersttitzten sich schwer in einem demokratischen Lande.' 'These methods don't support easily in a democracatic country.' 13 Steinbach (1998:74) cites the following examples with treffen 'to meet' as grammatical: (i) Der Weihnachstmann tnfft sich nicht so leicht. (=(37a)) 'Father Christmas doesn't meet that easily.' (ii) Freundliche Menschen treffen slch in d2eser Stadt iiberall. (= (37b)) Steinbach says that some verbs which are ambiguous between an activity and an achievement interpre- tation have only an achievement interpretation when used as a middle, thus treffen has only an achieve- ment interpretation when used as a middle: "sentence (37a), for example does not mean that it is hard to arrange a get-together with Father Christmas but that it is hard to meet him altogether" (1998: 74); (b) is ambiguous between a middle interpretation and a reciprocal interpretation (1998: 74, fn. 41). J. Mahng / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 439 What accounts for the ungrammaticality of these examples? The existence of lex- ical restrictions on MF has been widely noted, and the exact nature of the constraints on MF has been the subject of much research. A common assumption is that MF is a rule which externalizes the direct internal argument of a verb, in other words, only verbs taking a direct internal argument can form grammatical middles (Carrier and Randall, 1992, Sec. 3.2; Rapoport, 1993; see also Ackema and Schoorlemmer, 1994, 1995). Rapoport (1993) argues that middles are possible only when the verb has a transitive LCS, i.e. when the subject of the middle is associated with the CAUSE- governed position in the LCS. (47) a. b. [ x CAUSE [ y ...]] (Rapoport, 1993: 178, (31)) "Any NP in the syntax which is associated with an LCS variable in the position of the variable y in the phrase introduced and governed by CAUSE in (31) can be the subject of a middle or the host of a depictive predicate." It has often been claimed that only verbs with 'affected' internal arguments may undergo MF (Roberts, 1988). Carrier and Randall (1992: 189, fn. 15), Fagan (1992: 65) and Steinbach (1998: 18) all note that this restriction is too strong. Fagan (1992: 76f.) argues for the relevance of a notion of 'responsibility', such that some property of the subject of the middle must be 'responsible' for the event described by the verb. What Fagan apparently did not consider in this regard is the possibility that the very factors that she discusses for these verbs will also take care of lehren, making it unnecessary to add the stipulation in condition (c) and also helfen, making it unnecessary to add the stipulation in condition (a). In other words, dative case is not to blame. Such examples suggest that the restriction is underlyingly thematic. Whatever account proves best in the long run, a consequence will be that goal arguments do not undergo Middle Formation because they are the wrong kind of internal argu- ment. They are not 'affected patients' or 'themes' or 'responsible' participants, or do not occur in the right position in the verb's LCS. What I wish to emphasize here is that whatever accounts for the often-cited contrast between direct and indirect objects is not limited to the IO of ditransitive verbs. The DO of two-place predicates do not form a homogeneous class. The following minimal pair nicely illustrates this. 14 (48) a. Plastic surfaces scratch easily. (Theme) b. *Cats scratch most easily under the chin (Experiencer) (Intended: it is easiest/best to scratch a cat under the chin.) Recall that invoking a lexical case restriction was motivated by the assumption that the presence of lexical case marking on the object of helfen is the only difference ~4 Knud Lambrecht (p.c.) points out that the contrast which I interpret as theme vs. experiencer is encoded by different lexical items in German (kratzen vs. kraulen) and in French ((se) raver vs. grat- ter[gratouiller). 440 J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 between the 'direct theta-roles' of the two verbs. But this assumption is dubious, since there is every reason to suppose that they bear different thematic roles as well: wash takes a theme, whereas help takes a beneficiary, a subclass of goal arguments. To summarize, we find the following correlation between m-case, thematic role and the ability of an object to externalize in the German middle construction, shown in Table 2: Table 2 German middles 0-role m-case German verb Middle Theme Acc waschen 'to wash' swh waschen Theme Dat none n/a Goal Acc bitten 'to ask' *sich bitten Goal Dat helfen 'to help' *sich helfen Note the blank entries in the row for dative-marked themes. There is a partial corre- lation between m-case and thematic role in German, namely, theme arguments never bear lexical case. Thus, although there exist accusative goal arguments, there are no dative themes. The obvious question to ask is whether there exist any languages in which this restriction does not hold. The answer to this question is, fortunately, yes: there is at least one such language, namely, Icelandic. (See Appendix A for detail.) 3.2. Middle formation in Icelandic If MF is the externalization of an affected patient/theme argument, and Icelandic has lexically case-marked themes, then it should come as no surprise that lexical case does not block MF in Icelandic. The middle in Icelandic is morphologically marked by the addition of an -st suffix rather than an independent reflexive pronoun as in the German middle) 5 The examples below are all formed from verbs which take dative objects in the active voice. Note both the lack of case-preservation accompanying externalization of this argument, and the fact that this argument may be either animate or inanimate. (49 a. Olfa og vatn blandast illa saman. oil and water mix poorly together b. F61k breytist aldrei. 'People never change.' c. I~essi s6fi breytist f rtlm. this sofa converts into a.bed d. Mj61kin hellist si6ur niSur dr l~essum bolla. 'Milk spills less easily from this sort of cup.' ~5 Cf. Anderson (1990) for a detailed discussion of the Icelandic middle. J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 441 e. Lyklar t:nast 6sjaldan. keys get.lost not.seldom 'Keys often get lost.' f. Iaessi hur~ loesist eldd. this door locks not 'This door doesn't lock.' However, not all verbs which govern dative case form grammatical middles. On the intended reading where the nominative subject of the middle corresponds to the dative object of the active voice verb, the following examples are just as ungram- matical as their English counterparts. (50) a. *Gamalt f61k hjdlpast ilia. 'Old people don't help easily.' b. *Tfiningar bakkast ilia. 'Teenagers don't thank easily.' c. *Foreldrar tileinkast au~Sveldlega. 'Parents dedicate.to easily.' d. *B6rn bj6i~ast au~Sveldlega heim. 'Children invite home easily.' e. *Hundar gefast au~veldlega. 'Dogs feed easily.' f. *B6min h6tast auSveldlega. 'Children threaten easily.' As expected, many verbs taking accusative objects do form good middles, as illus- trated in (51): (51) a. Barni~ fannst eftir mikla leit. 'The child was found after a long search.' b. Kennslutfmar hefjast kl. 9. 'Classes begin at 9.' c. Hlj6~i~5 heyrist langa lei~5. 'The sound is easily heard from afar.' d. Laxar l~,jast ekki (au~veldlega). 'Salmon don't tire (easily).' e. Gluggarnar opnast auSveldlega. 'The windows open easily.' f. B~ekur seljast velum j61in. 'Books sell well at Christmas.' Not surprisingly, however, accusative case marking on an object is no guarantee of an acceptable middle. On the intended reading where the nominative subject of the middle corresponds to the accusative object of the active, the following examples are just as ungrammatical as their English translations. 442 J. Maling / Lmgua 111 (2001) 419-464 (52) a. *Vi6skiptavinir aSstoSast au6veldlega. customers assist easily b. *Vei6ib6nn sty6jast auSveldlega. hunting.bans support easily c. *Amma heimsoekist auSveldlega. Grandma visits easily d. *Konur kve6jast ilia. women say.good-bye.to poorly 'Women don't say.good-bye.to easily.' The facts for Icelandic are summarized in Table 3, which shows clearly that the abil- ity of a verb to form a middle is correlated not with the morphological case assigned to the verb's object, but rather with the thematic role assigned to that object. Table 3 Icelandic middles 0-role m-case Icelandic verb Middle Theme Acc opna 'to open' opnast Theme Dat loka 'to close' lokast Goal Acc ai~stoi~a 'to assist, help' *agJsto~ast Goal Dat hjdlpa "to help' *hj6lpast Why, then, does lexical case appear to block MF in German, when it so clearly does not in Icelandic? The explanation for this apparent contrast lies, I have sug- gested, lies in the different distribution of lexical case in the two languages. It is only in Icelandic that a lexically case-marked NP will meet the semantic and aspectual restrictions on MF. Precisely because lexical case can be assigned to themes in Ice- landic, as well as to goals/experiencers, it is possible to show that it is not the pres- ence of lexical case per se that blocks Middle Formation. Whatever the correct account for the failure of goal arguments to externalize, the presence or absence of lexical case marking on the verbal object is irrelevant. Once again, dative case is not to blame. I have argued that dative case is not to blame for the failure of certain verbal objects to undergo MF in German. Let us now turn to similar evidence for that dative case is not to blame for observed constraints in two other constructions which pattern with MF, namely, the licensing of secondary predicates and adnominal genitives. 3.3. Depictive predicates Independent support for a thematic restriction on MF comes from the clear con- trast in which verbs license secondary predicates on their objects. It has been argued that object-hosted depictive predicates are restricted by the thematic role assigned by the verb to its object. Consider the well-known contrasts in (53): J. Maling /Ltngua 111 (2001) 419--464 443 (53) a. Pat sold the boy [the fish]i fresh, b. *Pat sold [the boy], the fish hungry,. Williams (1980) suggests that predication is restricted to cases in which the NP is the 'theme' of the verb, thus accounting for observed contrast between the DO and IO as possible hosts. In (a), the depictive adjective fresh modifies the theme the fish, so the predication is acceptable; in (b) the predicate hungry modifies the NP the boy, which is the goal. The sentence is therefore ungrammatical. The same contrasts are found in German, as illustrated below. (54) a. Ich habe Maria den Fisch roh serviert. 'I served Maria the fish raw.' b. Ich habe Maria den Fisch nackt serviert. 'I served Maria the fish naked/ungarnished.' The host of the depictive adjective nackt 'naked' in (54b) can be either the sub- ject lch or the object den Fisch (in which case it means 'ungarnished'), but not the indirect object Maria. This is brought out more clearly in the following example where nackt precedes the DO, and the subject-host reading is contradictory. (55) *Der elegant gekleidete Kellner hat der Frau nackt den Fisch serviert. 'The elegantly dressed waiter served the woman the fish naked.' As in English, a prepositional object cannot host a depictive predicate. Thus the fol- lowing examples are ungrammatical; in (56b), the generally available subject-host reading is ruled out by the presence of the semantically contradictory adjective 'sober'. (56) a. *Ich stellte den Fisch in den Backofen sehr heir. (PP-host) 'I put the fish into the oven very hot' b. *Die ntichterne Hure vergntigte sich mit ihrem Freier betrunken. 'The sober prostitute enjoyed herself with her client drunk.' These are the sort of data which have been taken to support the hypothesis that IOs are underlyingly the object of a null preposition. Once again, what gets over- looked in this regard is that the same contrasts can be found with two-place (dyadic) predicates taking a single object. ~6 The standard examples of secondary depictive adjectives involve accusative objects as hosts; some examples are given below. ~6 I ignore the curious but generally unnoted fact that only certain adjectives work naturally. The exam- pies cited in the literature tend to contain the ubiquitous adjectives drunk and naked, even though adjec- tives like tired and sick seem like perfectly good stage-level predicates. Exactly the same judgments hold for English and Norwegian. (i) Der Arzt hat reich nackt untersucht (ii) ?Der Arzt hat reich miide untersucht (lii) ?Der Arzt hat reich krank untersucht 'The doctor examined me-ACC naked/?tired/?sick.' 444 J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 (57) a. Der elegant gekleidete Arzt hat die Frau nackt untersucht. 'The elegantly dressed doctor examined the woman naked.' b. Der niichteme Anwalt hat mieh betrunken in den Zeugenstand gerufen. 'The sober lawyer called me-ACC drunk to the witness box.' c. Die ntichterne Hure genoB ihren Freier betrunken. 'The sober prostitute enjoyed her client drunk.' (57c) has approximately the same meaning as (56b), but is grammatical since the intended host is now a direct object rather than the object of Preposition. An inter- esting contrast is provided by the sentence in (58), to be compared with the ungram- matical (55). (58) Der elegant gekleidete Kellner servierte die Frau nackt. 'The elegantly dressed waiter served the woman naked.' This sentence is grammatical on what might be called the 'Greenaway reading', referring to Peter Greenaway, a famous British movie director. 17 In his movie 'The cook, the thief, his wife and her lover', a naked woman is served up on a platter at a dinner party. On this reading, the naked woman is, of course, the (accusative) theme rather than the (dative) goal, and as such, can host the depictive predicate. As expected, the dative objects of verbs like helfen 'help' and danken 'thank' can- not host a depictive adjective, as illustrated by the following examples: (59) a. *Der elegant gekleidete Arzt hat der Frau nackt ins Biiro geholfen. 'The elegantly dressed doctor helped the woman-D nacked into the office.' b. *Der niichteme Gast hat seinem Wirt betrunken gedankt. 'The sober guest thanked his host-D drunk.' c. *Der ntichterne Student hat seinem Professor betrunken widersprochen. 'The sober student contradicted his professor drunk.' But the failure of the objects of these verbs to host depictive adjectives cannot be blamed on dative case. First, as illustrated by the examples in (60), certain dative arguments can host a depictive adjective: (60) a. Betrunken gef'~illt ihm diese Frau am besten. (ambiguous) drunk pleases him-D this-N woman best 'Drunk he likes this woman best.' b. Betrunken ist ibm dieser Plan nicht gelungen. 'Drunk he didn't succeed in his plan.' c. Betrunken kommt mir diese Nachricht komisch vor. drunk comes me-D this news-N strange Prt 'This news seems strange to me drunk.' ~7 Thanks to Katharina Hartrnarm for this example. J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 445 d. Betrunken miBlingt mir Marmorkuchen immer. 'Drunk I never succeed in making a marble cake.' e. Betrunken erscheinen mir solche Analysen immer richtig. drunk appear me-D such analyses-N always right 'Such analyses always appear right to me drunk.' Note that in (60a), the verb gefallen 'to like' takes two animate arguments which could potentially host the adjective betrunken; this German sentence is ambiguous exactly like its English counterpart, despite the dative case-marking on the experi- encer argument. Let us assume that the thematic hierarchy ranks Agent > Experi- encer > Goal > Theme. I suggest that the reason precisely these dative experiencers can host depictives is that they are thematically the highest argument of these verbs, since the nominative argument is a theme, rather than an agent, as is the case for a verb like 'help'. A second argument for assuming that dative case is not to blame for the failure of dative objects of agentive verbs to host secondary predicates is based on the many objects which cannot host a depictive adjective even though they are bear accusative case, as illustrated by the examples in (61). 18 (61) a. *Die ntichteme Frau hat ihren Mann betrunken angerufen. 'The sober woman called up her husband drunk.' b. *Der elegant gekleidete Kellner bediente die Frau nackt. 'The elegantly dressed waiter served the woman naked.' c. *Ein niichterner Barkeeper hat den Gast betrunken bedient. 'A sober bartender served the customer drunk.' d. *Der niichterne Angeklagte rief den Richter betrunken um Gnade an. 'The sober defendant appealed.to the judge-ACC drunk for mercy.' e. *Die ntichterne Frau bat den Richter betrunken um Milde. 'The sober woman asked the judge-ACC drunk for leniency.' f. *Der elegant gekleidete Arzt hat den Patienten nackt fiber die Therapie unterrichtet. 'The elegantly dressed doctor instructed the patient-ACC naked on the ther- apy.' g. *Die niichterne Frau hat ihren Freund betrunken nach Hause eingeladen. 'The sober woman invited her friend-ACC home drunk.' is Some speakers describe the object reading not as completely ungrammatical, but simply dispre- ferred. The point is that for all speakers there is a contrast. Some speakers allowed a depictive on the indirect object of traditionally ACC-ACC verbs like lehren/lernen, abfragen, independently of the actual case marking on the IO, even though they didn't accept MF applied to the same argument. (i) %Der niichterne Lehrer hat den Sehiiler betrunken die Verben abgefragt. 'The sober teacher tested the student-A drunk [on] the verbs.' (ii) %Der niichterne Priester hat mir das Gedicht betrunken gelemt. the sober Priest taught me-D drunk the poem. 446 J. Maling /Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 h. ? ?Der elegant gekleidete Arzt wollte den Patienten nackt im Krankenhaus besuchen. 'The elegantly dressed doctor wanted to visit the patient-ACC in the hospi- tal naked.' i. ? ?Der niJchterne Priester hat den Studenten betrunken ein Gedicht lehren wollen. 'The sober priest wanted to teach the student-ACC a poem drunk.' Whatever accounts for the failure of these accusative objects to host depictives will also account for the failure of dative objects to host depictives, without appeal to dative case. The pattern for German is summarized in Table 4. Table 4 German secondary predicates object 0-role m-case German verb Object as host of depictive predicate Theme Acc untersuchen 'examine" possible Theme Dat none n/a Goal Acc bedtenen 'serve' not possible Goal Dat helfen 'help' not possible 3.4. Nominalizations Another construction which distinguishes clearly between theme and goal argu- ments comes from deverbal process nominals. The same factors (e.g. affectedness) are often assumed to constrain both nominalizations and middle formation (Tenny, 1992), and object-host depictives (Rapoport, 1993). The difference between theme and goal arguments is reflected in English nominalizations in at least two ways: (i) in the choice of preposition and (ii) for deverbal process nominals, in the interpreta- tion of adnominal genitives as corresponding to the verb's subject or object. Some English examples are given in (62)-(63): (62) Our help/thanks tol*of the hostess went unacknowledged. (Wasow, 1977: 388) (63) a. the student's rescue (ambiguous: either subjective or objective genitive) b. the student's help (unambiguous: subjective genitive only) The relevant generalizations are as follows. First, themes but not goals can be marked with the case-assigning preposition of, as illustrated in (62). Second, themes but not goals can be linked to the adnominal genitive position when the head N is a deverbal process nominal, as shown in (63). Wasow (1977: 338) expresses the dif- ference in terms of grammatical functions, e.g. the verbs help and thank are said to take 'indirect objects' as their objects. In his comments on Wasow's paper, Ander- son (1977) interprets the distinction instead as one of thematic role (goal vs. theme). J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 447 Toman (1987) discusses argument structure inheritance in nomalizations in Ger- man. He observes that inherent case, that is dative or genitive on verbal objects, can- not be realized as such in a nominalization; in particular, adnominal datives are excluded. 19 (64) a. *die Hilfe meinem Freund (Toman, 1987: 22) the help my-DAT friend b. die Widmung der Sinfonie (*dem Prinz Wilhelm) the dedication the symphony-GEN Prince Wilhelm-DAT Toman argues that this restriction has nothing to do with the inheritance of lexically case-marked arguments, which can be realized in AP's where dative complements are allowed. The output of nominalization is limited by language particular con- straints on NP-structure; the exclusion of adnominal datives follows directly from the base hypothesis or structure-preserving principle (Emonds, 1976), since indepen- dently of nominalizations, the P-S rules for NPs in German do not admit adnominal datives. This exclusion of dative complements from NPs is a clearly language-spe- cific restriction, as shown by the fact that in Russian, for example, lexical case on a verbal argument is inherited in the nominalizations of transitive verbs governing Dative, Genitive or Instrumental on their object. (65) a. sosrd N pom6g starikt] o b. p6mosCh j sosrdac starikti D c. *p6mosCh j stariktlt~ sosrdomt (66) a. stan'k N otvrtil sosrdut~ b. otvrt starik~ sosrduD c. *otvrt sosrduo starikomt 'the neighbor helped the old man-D' 'the neighbor's help [to] the old man-D' 'the old man answered the neighbor-D' 'the old man's answer [to] the neighbor-D' Something more needs to be said about what rules out the Instrumental marking on the Agents if adnominal genitive has not be used, as in (65c) and (66c), but it is clear that because lexical case on a verbal object is obligatorily inherited, a Russian nom- inalization can have two adnominal NPs: a structural genitive plus a lexically case marked complement. But in Germanic languages, at most a single adnominal geni- tive is allowed; any other verbal arguments must be expressed as the object of a semantically appropriate preposition. Toman assumes that the exclusion is due to the obligatory preservation of inherent case on the dative, which by assumption is inher- ently associated with a given verbal argument in the lexicon, and must therefore be inherited by the nominalization. 3.4.1. Icelandic nominalizations What about nominalizations in Icelandic? At first blush, Toman's argument would seem to carry over to Icelandic. The Icelandic counterparts to the examples in t9 Toman shows (1987: 25) that adnominal genitive case must be distinguished from 'ad-verbal' geni- tive, which cannot be inherited: *ihr Gedenken der Soldaten 'her memory the-soldier-GEN.'. 448 J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 (67) are shown below; note that the verb tileinka 'dedicate' does not allow the goal argument to be realized as a PP: (67) a. *[hj~ilp vfnum mfnum] help friend-DAT my-DAT b. *[tileinkun b6karinnar konunni hans] var s6rkennileg dedication book-GEN wife-DAT his was unique c. Hann tileinkaSi konunni sinni b6kina. he dedicated wife-D refl-D the.book-A d. *Hann tileinkaSi b6kina til konunnar sinnar. he dedicated the.book to wife refl However, once again, we find that dative case is not to blame. The evidence from Icelandic nominalizations indicates that the restriction is independent of lexical case marking, a fact noted by Yip et al. (1987: 233). Consider the nominals derived from two verbs which govern dative case on their objects in Icelandic, hj6lpa 'to help' and bjarga 'to rescue'. Just as in English, the adnominal genitive can be understood as either subjective or objective in the case of 'rescue', but can only be inpreted as a subjective genitive in the case of 'help'. (68) a. hj~ilp kennarans help the.teacher-GEN 'the teacher's help' b. bj6rgun kennarans rescue the.teacher-GEN 'the teacher's rescue' (unambiguous - subject reading only) (ambiguous: subject or object) If lexical case is not the source of the unavailability of the object reading in the nom- inalization of verb like hj61pa 'help', then what is? Once again, the key lies in rec- ognizing that the mapping between thematic role and morphological case is not nec- essarily one-to-one. As expected, many accusative objects can map to the adnominal genitive position, as illustrated in (69). (69) a. dr~ip barnsins Hann drap barni6. 'the killing of the child' he killed the.child-ACC b. ey~ilegging borgarinnar Herinn ey6ilagSi borgina. 'the destruction of the city' the.army destroyed the.city-ACC c. misnotkun barnsins Hann misnotaSi barni6. 'abuse of the child' he abused the.child-ACC d. pynting fangans Einhver pyntaSi fangann. 'the torture of the prisoner' someone tortured the.prisoner-ACC e. skfrn barnsins Presturinn sklrSi bamiS. 'the christening of the child' the.priest christened the.child-ACC f. stilling lj6sanna t~g stillti lj6sin. 'adjustment of the lights' I adjusted the.lights-ACC J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 449 However, accusative case-marking is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition. Many dative objects can also map to the adnominal genitive position; some exam- ples are given in (70): (70) a. bjtirgun sjrmannsins 'the rescue of the sailor' b. breyting fundartimans 'change of the meeting time' c. eyeing skjalsins 'the deletion of the file' d. frestun fundarins 'the postponement of the meeting' e. lokun verslunarinnar 'the closing of the store' f. nau~gun konunnar 'the rape of the woman' g. seinkun v~larinnar 'the delay of the plane' h. umbylting alls h~r i skrlanum i. tlthlutun verOlaunanna 'the distribution of prizes' tltr~ming geirfuglsins 'extermination of the great auk' k. 6tskffun morgJingjans 'banishment of the murderer' Iaeir bjrrgu~u sj6manninum. ~ey rescued the.sailor-DAT Eg breytti fundartimanum. I changed the.meeting.time-DAT Hann eyddi skjalinu 6vart. he deleted the.file-DAT unawares Hann fresta~i fundinum. he postponed the.meeting-DAT Htln loka~i versluninni kl. 9. she closed the.store-DAT at 9 Hann nau~ga~i konunni. he raped the.woman-DAT Flugfrlagi8 seinka~i v~linni. the.airline delayed the.plane 'the change of everything here in the school' Iaeir tithluta verrlaununum eftir m6tiS. they distribute the.prizes-DAT after the.meet islendingar titr~mdu geirfuglinum. Icelanders exterminated the.great.auk- DAT Iaeir tltsktlfu~Su morringjanum. they banished the.murderer-DAT On the other hand, many accusative objects cannot map to the adnominal genitive position, as illustrated in (71). Only the subjective genitive reading is available for these examples. (71) a. a~Ssto8 viOskiptavinarins 'the customer's assistance' assistance to the customer b. heims6kn sjt~klingsins 'the patient's visit' c. *heims6kn grafarinnar 'the grave's visit' d. kveSja heirursgestsins 'the guest of honor's saying good-bye' :~ saying good-bye to the guest of honor e. *banahtigg krpsins 2° 'deathblow of the sealpup' 20 This could only have the implausible meaning of a deathblow delivered by the sealpup. 450 J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 f. *stuSningur hvalveiJibannsins support for the whaling ban' These are all verbs whose objects are thematically goals. Even when they are the direct objects of the base verbs, not the objects of a preposition, goal arguments must be realized as PP complements to the derived nominal. (72) a. aSsto8 vi8 viSskiptavininn 'assistance to the customer' b. heims6kn til grafarinnar/til sjfklingsins 'a visit to the grave/the patient' c. kveSja til heiSursgestsins 'saying good-bye to the guest of honor' d. stu6ningur vi~ hvalveiSibanni5 'support for the whaling ban' Not surprisingly, goal objects which are marked dative cannot map to the adnominal position either. Only the subjective genitive reading is available for the following examples. (73) a. heimbo8 kennarans 'the teacher's invitation to his/her own home' the invitation of the teacher to one's home b. hj~ilp kennarans 'teacher's help' c. h6tun kennarans 'teacher's threat' d. tileinkun rith6fundarins 'the author's dedication' e. *tileinkun konunnar af rith6fundinum dedication wife-GEN by the.author f. fisksala Evr6pumanna 'the sale of fish by Europeans' the sale of fish to Europeans g. ver~51aunat~thlutun sigurvegaranna 'the prize-distribution by the winners' h. verSlaunaveiting sigurvegaranna 'prize-awarding by the winners' ~: the awarding of prizes to the winners i. vinveiting gestanna 'wine-offering by the guests' the offering of wine to the guests j. ~6kk kennarans 'the teacher's thanks' @ thanks to the teacher J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 451 The results are summarized in Table 5. The descriptive generalization is that goal arguments cannot map to adnominal genitive position in Icelandic, regardless of the morphological case they happen to bear as a verbal object. Table 5 Icelandic Nominalizations Object 0-role m-case Icelandic verb Nominalization Interpretation of adnominal genitive Theme Acc skira 'to baptize' Theme Dat bjarga 'to rescue' Goal Acc absto~a 'to assist, help' Goal Dat hj61pa 'to help' skim barnsins ambiguous bj6rgun sj6mannsins ambiguous a5stoO viOskiptavinarins subject-only hj61p kennarans subject-only 3.4.2. German nominalizations We would therefore expect the same to be true of German. 21 As expected, many accusative objects can map to the adnominal genitive position, whereas a dative object never can. Thus, a NP like die Rettung des Seemans 'the sailor's rescue' is in principle ambiguous. By now, it should come as no surprise that we find the same pattern as we did for MF and secondary predication. Many accusative objects can map to the adnominal genitive position, as illustrated in (74). (74) a. Die Rettung des HeiBluftballonfahrers verlief ohne Zwischenfall. 'The rescue of the balloonist proceeded without incident.' (objective genitive) b. Rettungen der Kiistenwache veflaufen in der Regel ohne Zwischenfiille rescues [by] the coastguard-G proceed as a rule without incident (subjective reading) c. die Zerst6rung der Stadt 'the destruction of the city' d. die Taufe des Kindes 'the christening of the child' It is not surprising that dative objects cannot correspond to the adnominal genitive. 22 The noun phrases in (75) allow only the subjective genitive interpretation. 2~ My two Austrian informants told me that the adnominal genitive is not part of their spoken speech. I got the impression that process nominalizations are less productive in German than in English. 22 As noted in Toman (1987: 22), a dative object can be linked to an adnominal genitive when the head N is an agent nominal rather than a process nominal: (i) Der Heifer des Mannes/*dem Mann the helper of.the-G man-G/*the man-D The same is true of English agent-nonunals: our helper, my caller. The contrast between agent nominals and plain nominalizations should fall out, given an adequate account of the argument structure changes effected by these lexical rules. 452 J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 (75) a. die Hilfe des Priesters 'the priest's help' b. der Dank des Wirtes 'the thanking by the host' expressing thanks to the host c. der Widerspruch des Papstes 'the pope's contradicting' contradicting the pope (subject reading only) Clearer judgments can be obtained by adding a 'subject' in the form of a prenominal possessive, 23 thus ruling out the subject reading for the adnominal genitive. The ver- bal object must be realized as the object of a semantically appropriate P; compare the ungrammatical examples in (76) to the grammatical nominalization in (77) where the goal argument is realized as a PP rather than an adnominal genitive. (76) a. *seine Hilfe der Hinterbliebenen (intended: his help for the bereaved) his help of.the survivors-GEN b. *die Hilfe des Hinterbliebenen dutch den Priester the help of.the survivor-GEN through the priest (intended: the priest's help for the bereaved) c. *ihr Dank des Wirtes (intended: her thanks to the host) her thanks of.the host-GEN d. *sein Widerspruch des Papstes (intended: his contradicting of the Pope) his contradiction of.the Pope-GEN (77) lhr Dank an den Wirt 'her thanks to the host' However, just as with MF and depictive predicates, the lexical dative case associated with the verbal objects is not what prevents them from occurring as adnominal gen- itives. The same goal-like accusative objects which cannot host depictives or undergo MF also cannot occur as adnominal genitives. (78) a. Die Bitte des Priesters um Verzeihung war optimistisch. 'The request of the priest-G for forgiveness was optimistic.' (only subject reading) cf. Er wollte den Priester um Verzeihung bitten. 'He wanted to ask the priest-ACC for forgiveness.' b. *Der Anruf tier Hinterhliehenen nach eineim ttidlichen Unfall ist immer schwer. 'The calling [of] the bereaved-G after a fatal accident is always difficult.' cf. Die Polizei muss die Hinterbliebenen nach einem t~dlichen Unfall anrufen. 'The police must call the bereaved-ACC after a fatal accident.' _~3 Thanks to Ray Jackendoff for suggesting this. J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 453 c. Der Angriff des Richters (*dutch den Angeklagten) war dumm. 'The attack [of]the judge-G (*by the defendant) was stupid.' (only subject reading) cf. Der Angeklagte hat den Richter angegriffen. 'The defendant attacked the judge-ACC.' d. *Der konstante Angriff des Pr~isidenten durch die Medien ist politisch motiviert. 'The media's constant attack on the president is politically motivated.' cf. Die Medien haben den Pr~isidenten konstant angegriffen. e. Das Treffen des Studenten *(mit seinem Professor) the meeting [of] the student-G *(with his Professor) ... (subject reading only) 24 cf. Der Professor hat einen Studenten getroffen. 'The professor met a student-ACC.' f. Der Unterricht tier Kinder ist ausgezeichnet (can only mean 'the teaching done by children') z5 'The instruction [of] the children-G is excellent.' cf. Der Lehrer hat die Kinder unterrichtet. 'The teacher instructed the children-ACC.' As in English and Icelandic, goal-arguments must be realized as the object of a semantically appropriate preposition: (79) a. Die Bitte an den Priester um Verzeihung 'the request to the priest for forgiveness' b. Der Angriff auf den Pr~isidenten 26 'the attack on the president' c. Das Treffen (des Professors) mit seinem Studenten 'the meeting with his student' I uncovered a number of apparent counterexamples: accusative goals which do map to adnominal genitive in German. 24 This example ~s ungrammatical if the adnominal complement is singular; it's okay if the adnominal complement is plural, because the verb treffen 'meet' allows a plural subject with no object: Die Stu- denten haben sich auf dem Markt getroffen 'The students met at the market.'. (i) das Treffen der Studenten auf dem Markt 'the meeting of the students at the market' (subject reading only) '-5 However, the following sentence is apparently acceptable (an affected object?): (i) die Unterweisung der Kinder im Violinespiel "the instruction of the children in violinplaying' 26 Thus the noun phrase *der Angrtffder Stadt cannot mean 'the attack on the city'; this contrasts min- imally with die Eroberung der Stadt 'the conquest of.the city' where the objective genitive interpretation is the preferred reading. 454 J. Malin g / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 (80) C. (81). a. b. a. Beim Besuch des Pr?isidenten in China gab es Ausschreitungen at-the visit of-the president in China there were protests (subjective genitive) b. Der Besuch des Grabs seiner verstorbenen Frau f'~illt ihm immer schwer the visit the grave-G his dead wife falls him-D always hard (objective genitive) 'the visit to/*of the grave of his dead wife is always hard for him' Das Bedienen des Kindes in der Kneipe war illegal (objective genitive) the serving the child-G in the bar was illegal Er hat das Grab seiner verstorbenen Frau besucht. 'he visited the grave-ACC of his dead wife' Der Kellner hat das Kind in der Kneipe bedient 'the waiter served the child-ACC in the bar' c. Der Knabe hat dem KdSnig treu dient. 'The boy served the king-DAT faithfully' Note the sharp ungrammaticality of the preposition of in the English counterpart of (80b) *a visit of the grave. These exceptions might give the impression that German nominalizations are in fact sensitive to m-case rather than theta-role. The verbs besuchen and bedienen are derived from suchen 'seek, look for' and dienen 'serve' respectively with the prefix be-, which in most instances ensures that the derived verb will take an accusative direct object even if the root verb takes a dative object as in the case of dienen, and correspondingly, that a (further) derived nominal will allow objective genitives~yon-phrases (Rex Sprouse, personal communication). By and large, however, the general pattern seems to be the same in German as in Ice- landic, as summarized in Table 6: Table 6 German nominalizations Object 0-role m-case German verb Nominalization Interpretation of adnominal genitive Theme Acc retten 'rescue' cite Rettung des Seemans ambiguous Theme Dat none n/a n/a Goal Acc bitten "ask' die Bitte des Prtesters subject-only Goal Dat helfen 'help' dw Hilfe des Priesters subject-only The same pattern is found with synthetic compounds of the type discussed by Baker (1997) for English. Accusative goals, which cannot be incorporated, pattern just like dative indirect objects. (82) a. *Die Priesterbitte um Verzeihung the priest-asking for forgiveness cf. Er will den Priester um Verzeihung bitten he wants the priest-A for forgiveness to.ask J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 455 cf. Die Bitte an den Priester um Verzeihung the asking to the priest for forgiveness b. *Die Familieneinladung zu einer Hochzeit ist zwingend. the family-inviting to a wedding is obligatory c. *Die Kinderbedienung in einer Kneipe ist illegal. the children-serving in a bar is illegal. cf. Der Kellner hat das Kind bedient. the waiter has the child-A served. d. *Der Kinderunterricht hier ist ausgezeichnet. the children-instruction here is excellent (can only mean teaching done by children) e. *Der Familienanruf nach einem t6dlichen Unfall ist immer schwer. the family-calling after a fatal accident is always difficult f. *Die Studentenabfrage unregelm~iBiger Verben dauerte den ganzen Nach- mittag. the student-testing irregular verbs lasted the whole afternoon There are rare examples of agentive compounds where the first member corresponds to the dative object of the verbal root, e.g. die Arzthelferin 'the doctor's receptionist' (literally, the doctor-helper (f.)). Such examples are not typical, however. 27 Agentive compounds are productive only with accusative themes; incorporating a dative argu- ment is not productive, as can be seen from the examples in (83): (83) a. Two-place verbs: Arzthelferin, *Kinderhelferin, *Altenhelferin, *Armen- helferin (intended: helper of children, the elderly or the poor) b. Three-place verbs: Blutspender 'blood donor' ; *Kirchenspender (intended: one who donates to the church); Geldgeber 'money donor'; *Armengeber (intended: one who gives to the poor). Overall, we find the same general pattern in which that goal arguments are prohib- ited. The ungrammaticality of the examples in (84), in which the first element of the compound corresponds to a goal argument marked accusative, shows once again that the dative case associated with the verbal objects in the above examples is not to blame. (84) a. *Krankenbesucher (intended: one who visits the sick) b. *K6nigbediener (intended: one who serves the king) c. *Gasteinlader (intended: one who invites a guest) d. *Richterbitter (intended: one who pleads to the judge) In conclusion, I have looked at three different constructions: MF, secondary pred- ication, adnominal genitives and synthetic compounds, where the presence of lexical _~7 Thanks to Markus Steinbach for this observation, and for providing the examples in (83). 456 J. Maling /Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 case marking on a verbal object has often been assumed to block the application of the lexical rule. In order to tell whether morphological case or thematic role is responsible for lexical restrictions, then we need to look for verbal arguments where m-case and thematic role depart from the expected correlations. This is particularly easy to do in a language like Icelandic, where all four possible combinations of theta role and m-case exist. In each of the constructions studied here, I have shown that Dative case is not to blame in either Icelandic or German. One might conjecture that lexical case marking per se never blocks the application of lexical rules in natural language, not even in languages like German where it does block NP-movement in the syntax because it constrains the mapping to grammatical functions. The alternative to admitting the possible relevance of thematic role is to pursue Baker's suggestion that in accordance with UTAH, goals always receive their theta- role from a (possibly null) preposition. As noted earlier, the logical consequence of this hypothesis is that the objects of simple transitive verbs like help, invite, thank, telephone, visit must also be (underlyingly) the objects of a null preposition. Not only will many linguists find this to be an unacceptable level of abstraction, but the null preposition analysis faces an empirical problem: explaining why the dative object of a null preposition can undergo passive in Icelandic, when the object of an overt preposition cannot (Maling and Zaenen, 1985). 4. Constructions where morphological case is responsible I have argued here the presence of dative case marking is not to blame for either lexical or co-occurrence restrictions. Lest one conclude that m-case serves only a purely decorative function in natural language, let me conclude by pointing out sev- eral instances where morphological case is the constraining factor. First, as noted earlier, lexical case marking does constrain the mapping of verbal arguments to grammatical functions in many languages including German, which does not allow grammatical subjects to bear lexical case. Alsina (1996:179) observes that subjects must be nondative in Romance, and further argues that this restriction cannot be reduced to a condition against the assignment of dative to an external argument. Another example where dative is the constrainint factor is the phenomenon of Topic Drop in German. 28 Sternefeld (1985: 407, 427) observes that accusative but not dative topics can be dropped in clause-initial position, as illustrated by the following contrast. (85) a. Was ist denn mit den Weingl~isem? (Die) hab' ich schon auf den Tisch gestellt. what is then with the wine-glasses? (them-ACC) have I already on the table put 28 Thanks to Markus Steinbach for this observation, and for providing the reference to Stemefeld (1985). J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 457 b. Was ist denn mit dem Peter? *(Dem) hab' ich schon geholfen/wider- sprochen. what is then with the Peter (him-DAT) have I already helped/contradicted We can control for the possible relevance of either animacy or thematic role by using verbs like einladen 'invite' and besuchen 'visit' whose objects are accusative goals. (86) a. (Den Peter) hab' ich schon eingeladen. the-ACC Peter have I already invited b. (Den Peter) hab' ich noch nicht besucht. the-ACC Peter have I not yet visited The full acceptability of Topic Drop with such sentences shows that dative case is indeed responsible for the ungrammaticality of (85b). The last examples I wish to discuss concerns the constraints on secondary predi- cates. As noted earlier, secondary predication is generally assumed to be subject to a structural condition such that the intended host must c-command the secondary pred- icate. (Cf. Winkler (1997) for a useful and detailed survey of the literature). The alert reader may have wondered why I provided Icelandic data on MF and nominaliza- tions, but not on secondary predication. The reason is that Icelandic does not exhibit this structural condition. As illustrated in (87), any NP, including indirect objects and prepositional objects, can host a depictive predicate. (87) a. Ormalyf ~i a~5 gefa hundunum svOngum Dative goal 'Worm medication must be given to the dogs-D hungry-D.' (=i.e., on an empty stomach) b. Aldrei skaltu gefa honum brennivfn sviingum. Dative goal 'Never give him brennivfn hungry.' c. t~g skila~Si J6ni b6kinni 61esinni. Dative theme 'I returned [to] John the book-D unread-D.' d. l~g hrifsaiSi af honum nestispakkann glorsoltnum og laeytti honum i sj6inn. 'I snatched from him-D his lunchbox ravenous-D and threw it into the sea.' Object of P e. Settu kj6ti~5 inn f ofninn eldheitan. Object of P put the.meat into the.oven-A redhot-A Here, apparently, morphological case is to "blame". More precisely, the relevant factor seems to be agreeing morphological case, which generally makes the intended antecedent clear. As argued by Hale (1981) and Laughren (1992) for Warlpiri, case agreement does the work of licensing secondary predicates (see also discussion by Rapoport, 1991: 179ff.). The licensing of secondary predicates is syntactic, either structural or via case agreement. Neither case alone nor agreement alone suffices to bypass the structural constraint. In Russian, for example, depictive adjectives are marked with an invariant case, instrumental, yet secondary predication is subject to the same structural constraints as in English. 458 J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 (88) a. *Teply lekarstva dolzhny davatjsja kotu golodnym worm medications should.be given cat-D hungry-INSTR b. ?*Nikogda ne davajte emu vodku golodnym never not give him-D vodka hungry-INST c. *Ja vyxvatil u nego-G korobku jarostnym-INST i I wrestled from him-GEN the.box angry and vykinul ee v more. threw it into the.sea mjaso v pech' raskalermym the.meat into the.oven red-hot d. *Polozhi put It seems to be crucial that the agreement be case agreement. In Norwegian, predicate adjectives agree in number, but there is no morphological case marking. Despite the existence of number agreement on adjectives, goal objects cannot host depictive predicates. If the object is a theme, then the host of the depictive adjective can be either the subject or the object; if the object is a goal, then only the subject-host reading is available. The grammaticality judgments can be made sharper by ensuring that subject and object disagree in number. The adjective naken is singular (m/0, whereas nakne is plural. (89) a. De s~i ham naken/#nakne they saw him naked b. De reddet ham nakne/naken they rescued him naked-pl./sg c. De bes¢kte ham nakne/*naken they visited him naked-pl./*sg d. De hjalp ham nakne/*naken they helped him naked-pl./*sg I conclude that it is the presence of agreeing morphological case on adjectives which serves to license secondary predicates in Icelandic even when c-command does not hold. 5. Conclusion So, what role does morphological case play in the grammar? With only four mor- phological cases in Germanic languages, it would be impossible for m-case to mark each possible thematic role unambiguously, no matter how coarsely-grained one's inventory of proto roles. The so-called structural cases do not distinguish e.g. the prototypical agent subject from the experiencer subject of hate~like~fear. Although there is no neat one-to-one correlation between m-case and thematic role, case does serve to identify verbal arguments on a verb-by-verb basis, even in Icelandic. Recall the two senses of bi~ja 'to ask', where the choice between accusative and dative marks the distinction between the addressee and the beneficiary. Although for many J. Mahng / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 459 verbs, m-case is redundant in that only one m-case can occur on the verb's object, speakers can and do generalize across lexical entries, as evidenced by language change and acquisition data. Speakers extract generalizations based on semantic or thematic factors, and extend those generalizations to new verbs. In Icelandic, dative has been extending not only to experiencers (a phenomenon known as l~6gufalls~ki 'dative-sickness'), but also to theme arguments under semantic generalization of 'movement' (BarSdal, 1993; Maling to appear). Nor is there necessarily a one-to-one correlation between m-case and GFs. Abstract Case theory is, I think, an unfortunate conflation of two quite distinct phe- nomena: (i) the licensing of NPs and (ii) the distribution of nominative/accusative as morphological cases vis-a-vis the core GFs of subject and object. Abstract Case the- ory is thus a theory not of morphological case, but rather of GFs. Although it is too late to take back the term 'Case' from Abstract 'Case Theory', it is not too late to consider grammatical functions, thematic role and m-case as separate and distinct phenomena. The discovery of both mismatches and partial mappings should only urge us to look more rigorously for the principles that underlie the linking regulari- ties among these phenomena within and across languages. After all, Dative case is not always to blame. Appendix A. Morphological case on verbal arguments in Icelandic as compared to German Although there are systematic linking regularities in the language, morphological case is demonstrably independent of both grammatical functions and thematic roles in Icelandic. This fact makes it an ideal language for teasing apart these grammatical notions in order to determine which is responsible for observed constraints on otherwise productive processes Consider first double object verbs, where there is general agreement about the thematic roles borne by the three verbal arguments. Double object verbs occur in six different case frames 29 in Icelandic, as shown in the table below from Yip et al. (1987: 226, Table 3), and illustrated in the example sentences in (90). Insofar as possible, the illustrative sentences have been chosen because the corresponding verbs cannot be used as double object verbs in English, (90) Ditransitive verbs in Icelandic a. NDA halda 'hold' Vi~ ~etlum a/5 halda forsetanum veislu. we plan to hold the.president-D party-A 'We plan to hold a party for the president.' aui~velda 'make easier' N~,ja trlvan hefur au~velda8 okkur starlit5 new computer has facilitated us-D the.job-A 'The new computer has made the job easier for us.' 29 The NAA case frame also occurs with complex transitive verbs, with accusative on the objective complement. Since the object complement is not an object, such verbs are not included in the count. It isn't clear that Icelandic actually has double object verbs with the NAA case frame, since the second accusative NP of kosta 'cost' and taka 'take' in the sense of 'it took me an hour' is an object rather than a measure adverbial of some kind. Helgi Skdli Kjartansson points out (pers. comm.) that for the verb kosta, the measure phrase took Dative rather than Accusative case in older periods of Icelandic. 460 J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 Table 8 Case frames for Icelandic double object verbs Case frame Typical Verb Approximate number of verbs NDA segja 'say' 75+ NAD leyna 'hide' 25 NAG krefja 'demand' 10 NDD lofa 'promise' 10 NDG 6 ska 'wish' 15 NAA kosta "cost' 2 b. NDD skila 'return' l~g skila~i c. NDG synja 'deny' d. NAD leyna 'hide' e. NAG bii~ja 'ask' spyrja 'ask' henni b6kinni. I-N returned her-D the.book-D 'I returned the book to her.' D6marinn synjaSi m6r leyfis. the.judge-N denied me-D permission-G Rti~herran leyndi forsetann sannleikanum. the.minister-N hid the.president-A the.truth-D 'The minister hid the truth from the president.' Htin ba8 mig b6nar. she asked me-A a.favor-G t~g spurSi hana margra spurninga. I asked her-A many questions-G This variety makes the Icelandic case-system remarkable. Given that there are so many different case frames for double object verbs, it is perhaps not surprising that there exist minimal pairs, in the sense that roughly synonymous verbs take different case frames. Three examples are shown in (91). (91) a. gefa 'give' NDA ~thluta 'hand out' NDD b. veita 'award' NDA sa~ma 'award' NAD c. leyna 'hide' NAD dylja 'hide' NAG Bj6rgunarmennirnir gfifu f6rnarl6mbum fl6iSanna teppi Bj6rgunarmennimir tithlutu6u f6rnarl6mbum f168anna teppum 'The rescue workers gave/distributed the flood victims blankets.' Forsetinn veitti m6r FfilkaorSuna. Forsetinn s~emdi mig F~ilkaorSunni. 'The president awarded me the Order of the Falcon.' R~iiSherrann leyndi forsetann I~vf. R~iSherrann duldi forsetann I~ess. the.minister-N hid the.president-A it-G 'The minister hid it from the president.' For double object verbs, then, the descriptive generalization for Icelandic is that the direct object, i.e. the theme argument, may be marked with any of the three non-nominative cases, while the indirect object (in the traditional sense) may be marked either dative or accusative but not genitive. I know of no explanation for the fact that only theme arguments can be marked with genitive case. Various linguists have discussed the possibility that the case of the IO is correlated with the thematic role it bears (see discussion in Yip et al., 1987: fn. 6). Holmberg and Platzack note that "there is a strong tendency in Icelandic to have dative Case J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 461 with benefactives and a less strong but still noticeable tendency to have accusative with male- factives" (1995: 199), citing e.g. the NAD verbs r~ena 'rob', leyna 'conceal', svipta 'deprive'. But there are enough exceptions to semantic generalizations such as this to lead us to conclude that the case of the IO must be stipulated in the lexical entry, at least for any verb that doesn't occur in the prototypical NDA case frame. What about simple transitive verbs with a single direct object? Does the morphological case on a verb's object correlate with the verbal semantics, and if so, how? Cross-linguisti- cally, dative case is typically associated with goals (e.g. indirect objects of ditransitive verbs) and experiencers. This is true in Germanic languages, as well; goal arguments which do not bear syntactic (nominative/accusative) case will bear dative case. Some monotransitive verbs taking dative goals in Icelandic and German are given in (92): (92) Some monotransitive verbs taking dative goals in Icelandic and German a. hjtlpa 'help'; [~akka 'thank'; bjt~a 'invite'; h6ta 'threaten'; umbuna 'reward'; gefa 'feed' b. helfen 'help'; danken 'thank'; begegnen 'meet'; drohen 'threaten'; schaden 'harm' ; fluchen 'curse' It is important to note that this correlation between m-case and thematic role is at best one-way, since not all goals are marked with dative case. For example, the German verb einladen 'to invite' takes an accusative object, whereas its Icelandic counterpart bj63a governs dative; the German begegnen 'meet' govems dative, whereas both German treffen 'meet' and Icelandic hitta govern accusative; similarly, the verb meaning 'to meet' governs dative in Japanese (au) but accusative in Korean (manna); the verb 'to visit' takes accusative in both German (besuchen) and Icelandic (heimseekja) although its object bears the thematic role of goal. I assume, there- fore, that dative case- marking is lexically-governed, and must be marked in the lexicon for each verb as associated with the relevant argument; any argument not marked for lexical case will get syntactic nominative/accusative case by the general principles of case assignment. However, lexical case-marking is not a reliable indicator of thematic role. In both Ice- landic and German, there are nearly synonymous verb pairs which govern different cases, e.g. German helfen and Icelandic hjdtlpa 'help' both govern dative, whereas German unterstiitzen and Icelandic a6stoOa 'to support' govern accusative. As we shall see, evidence from dever- bal nominals indicates that the objects of these verbs are thematically goals, despite the accusative case marking. Thus, lexical case-marking has a somewhat different distribution in Icelandic than it does in German. Icelandic differs from German in that it allows dative case to be associated with theme arguments as well as goals, the prototypical class of dative arguments. (93) Some Icelandic verbs taking Dative theme objects a. Monotransitives : bjarga 'rescue'; breyta 'change'; eyta 'destroy'; fori~a 'save'; gleyma 'forget'; hella nii~ur 'spill'; kasta 'throw'; Ioka 'close'; loesa 'lock'; sleppa 'release'; sOkkva 'sink'; tapa 'lose'; t~na 'lose'; umbylta 'revolutionize'; ~tsktlfa "expel, banish'; titr~ma 'exterminate'; (avarpa 'broadcast' b. Ditransitives: lofa 'promise'; skila 'return'; svara 'answer'; ~thluta 'distribute' In fact, as first noted by Bar~Sdal (1993), one of the semantic classes of objects which are marked dative in Icelandic are objects which undergo movement. These include the objects of verbs meaning to throw, and the load-class (Bar~Sdal, 1999; Maling to appear). 462 J. Mating / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 (94) a. Peir hl66u vagninn me6 heyi. they loaded the.wagon-A with hay b. l~eir hl6g~u heyinu {l vagninn. they loaded the.hay-D onto the.wagon. An argument which undergoes a change of location is a prototypical theme. References Ackema, Peter and Maaike Schoorlemmer, 1994. The middle construction and the syntax-semantics interface. Lingua 93, 59-90. Ackema, Peter and Maa~ke Schoorlemmer, 1995. Middles and nonmovement. Linguistic Inquiry 26, 173-197. Ahn, Sung-Ho and Jung-Tag Lee, 1994. The thematic nature of agentive eykey. In: Young-Key Kim- Renaud (ed.), Theoretical issues in Korean linguistics, 191-215. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications. Alsina, Alex, 1996. The role of argument structure in grammar: Evidence from Romance. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications. Anderson, Stephen R., 1977. Comments on the paper by Wasow. In: Akmajian, Culicover and Wasow (eds.), Formal syntax, 361-377. New York: Academic Press. Anderson, Stephen R., 1990. The grammar of Icelandic verbs in -st. In: J. Maling and A. Zaenen (eds.), Modem Icelandic syntax (Syntax and Semantics 24), 235-273. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Babby, Leonard, 1980. The syntax of surface case marking. Comell Working Papers in Linguistics 1, 1-32. Baker, Mark, 1988. Incorporation: A theory of grammatical function changing. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Baker, Mark, 1997. Thematic roles and syntactic structure. In: Liliane Haegeman (ed.), Elements of grammar: Handbook in generative syntax, 73-137. Dordrecht: Kluwer. BarSdal, J6hanna, 1993. Accusative and dative case of objects of some transitive verbs in Icelandic and the semantic distinction between them. In: Flyktf6rs6k: Kalasbok till Christer Platzack p~ femtio~rs- dagen 18 November 1993, fr~in doktorander och dylika, 1-13. Lund University. BarSdal, J6hanna, 1999. Case in Icelandic - A construction grammar approach. Tijdschrift voor Skandi- navistiek 20, 65-100. Bar&lal, J6hanna, 2000. Case assignment of nonce verbs in Icelandic. Unpublished manuscript, Lund University. Besten, Hans den, 1989. Studies in West Germanic Syntax. Doctoral dissertation, Katholieke Univer- site~t Brabant, Tilburg. Amsterdam: Rodopi. Burzio, Luigi, 2000. Anatomy of a generalization. In: Ken-ichi Takami, Akio Kamio and John Whitman (eds.), Syntactic and functional explorations in honor of Susumu Kuno, 277-322. Tokyo: Kurosio. Carder, Jill and Janet H. Randall, 1992. The argument structure of syntactic structure of resultatives. Linguistic Inquiry 23, 173-234. Collins, Chris and H6skuldur Thrfiinsson, 1996. VP-mtemal structure and object shift in Icelandic. Lin- guistic Inquiry 27, 391 A.A.A.. Czeplucb, Hartmut, 1982. Case theory and the dative construction. Linguistic Review 2, 1-38. Emonds, Joseph, 1976. A transformational approach to english syntax. Root, structure-preserving, and local transformations. New York: Academic Press. Emonds, Joseph, 1985. A unified theory of syntactic categories. Dordrect: Foils. Emonds, Joseph, 1994. Two principles of economy. In: G. Cinque et al. (eds.), Paths towards universal grammar: Studies in Honor of Richard S. Kayne, 155-172. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. Fagan, Sarah M.B., 1992. The syntax and semantics of middle constructions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419--464 463 Freidin, Robert and Rex Sprouse, 1991. Lexical case phenomena. In: R. Freidin (ed.), Principles and parameters in comparative grammar, 392-416. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. Hale, Kenneth, 1981. Preliminary remarks on the grammar of part-whole relations in Warlpiri. In: J. Hollyman and A. Pawley (eds.), Studies in Pacific languages and cultures, 333-344. Auckland: Lin- guistic Society of New Zealand. Hale, Kenneth and Samuel J. Keyser, 1976. A view from the middle lexicon project working papers 10, Center for Cognitive Science, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Haugan, Jens, 1998. Old Norse word order and information structure. Doctoral dissertation, University of Trondheim. Holmberg, Anders and Christer Platzack, 1995. The role of inflection in Scandinavian syntax. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Hudson, Richard, 1992. So-called 'double objects' and grammatical relations. Language 68, 251-276. Jun, Jong Sup, 1998. The English benefactive constructions and their conceptual structure. M.A. thesis, Seoul National University. Kim, Yonng-joo, 1989. Inalienable possession as a semantic relationship underlying predication: The case of multiple accusative constructions. Harvard Studies in Korean Linguistics 3, 445-467. Kim, Young-Joo, 1990. The syntax and semantics of Korean Case: The interaction between lexical and syntactic levels of representation. Doctoral dissertation, Harvard University. Seoul: Tayhak Press. Kim, Soowon and Joan Maling, 1997. A cross-linguistic perspective on resultative formation. In: R. Blight and M. Moosally (eds.), The syntax and semantics of predication, 189-204. Austin, TX: Um- versity of Texas at Austin, Linguistics Society. Kiparksy, Paul, 1987. Morphology and grammatical relations. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford Uni- versity. Laughren, Mary, 1992. Secondary predication as a diagnostic of underlying structure in Pama-Nyungan Languages. In: I. Roca (ed.), Thematic structure: Its role in grammar, 199-246. Bedim Foris/Walter de Gruyter. Maling, Joan 1993. Lexical case in middle formation: German vs. Icelandic. Paper read at the Linguis- tic Society of American winter meeting, January 1993. Maling, Joan, to appear. Dative object verbs in modem Icelandic. Islenskt m~il. Maling, Joan and Soowon Kim, 1992. Case assignment in the inalienable possession construction in Korean. Journal of East Asian Linguistics 1, 37-68. Maling, Joan and Annie Zaenen, 1985. Preposition-stranding and passive. Nordic Journal of Linguistics 8, 197-209. McCawley, James, 1988. Adverbial NPs: Bare or clad in see-through garb? Language 64, 583-590. Pustejovsky, James (ed.), 1993. Semantics and the lexicon (Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy 49). Dordrecht: Kluwer. Rapoport, Tova R., 1991. Adjunct-predicate licensing and D-structure. In: Susan Rothstein (ed.), Per- spectives on phrase structure: Heads and licensing (Syntax and Semantics 25), 159-187. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Rapoport, Tova R., 1993. Verbs in depictives and resultatives. In: James Pustejovsky (ed.), Semantics and the lexicon, 163-184. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Reis, Marga, 1985. Mona Lisa kriegt zuviel - vom sog. Rezipientenpassiv im Deutschen. Linguistiche Berichte 96, 140-155. Roberts, Ian, 1988. Predicative APs. Linguistic Inquiry 19, 703-710. Roeper, Thomas. 1993. Explicit syntax in the lexicon: The representation of nominalizations. In: James Pustejovsky (ed.), Semantics and the lexicon, 185-220. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Sells, Peter, Annie Zaenen and Draga Zec, 1987. Reflexivization variation: Relations between syntax, semantics and lexlcal structure. In: M. Iida, S. Wechsler and D. Zec (eds.), Working papers in gram- matical theory and discourse structure: Interactions of morphology, syntax and discourse, 169-238. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Sprouse, Rex, 1996. Thematic hierarchies and the argument-structure-syntax interface: Evidence from Germanic ditransitive verbs. In: Irrnengard Ranch and Gerald Carr (eds.), Insights in Germanic lin- guistics, vol. 2, 227-242. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 464 J. Maling / Lingua 111 (2001) 419-464 Steinbach, Markus, 1998. Middles in German: The syntax and semantics of transitive reflexive sen- tences. Doctoral dissertation, Humboldt University of Berlin. Stemefeld, Wolfgang, 1985. Deutsch ohne grammatische Funktionen: Ein Beilrag zur Rektions- und Bindungstheorie. Linguistische Berichte 99, 394--439. Suh, Cheong-Soo, 1996. Korean grammar, 2nd edition. Seoul: Hanyang University Press. Tenny, Caroe, 1992. The aspectual interface hypothesis. In: Ivan Sag and Anna Szabolcsi, eds. Lexical Matters, 1-27. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications. Toman, Jindrich, 1987. Wortsyntax (Linguistische Arbeiten 137). TiJbingen: Niemeyer. Vogel, Ralf and Markus Steinbach, 1998. The dative - an oblique case. Linguistiche Berichte 173, 65-90. Wasow, Thomas, 1977. Transformations and the lexicon. In: A. Akmajian, P. Culicover and T. Wasow (eds.), Formal syntax, 327-360. New York: Academic Press. Wegener, Heide, 1991. Der Dativ - ein stmkaa~eller Kasus? In: Gisbert Fanselow and Sascha Felix (eds.), Merkmale und Strukturen syntaktischer Kategorien, 70-103. Ttibingen: Narr. Whelpton, Matthew, 1995. The syntax and semantics of infinitives of result in English. Doctoral disser- tation, Oxford University. Williams, Edwin, 1980. Predication. Linguistic Inquiry 11,203-238. Winlder, Susanne, 1997. Focus and secondary predication (Studies in Generative Grammar 43). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. Yip, Moira, Joan Maling and Ray Jackendoff, 1987. Case m tiers. Language 63,217-250. Zaenen, Annie, Joan Maling and H6skuldur Thr~iinsson, 1985. Case and grammatical functions: The Ice- landic passive. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 3,441-483. 