LiR ua ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lmgua The syntactic basis of referential hierarchy phenomena: Clues from languages with and without morphological case * Lynn Nichols* Harvard University, Department of Linguistics, Cambridge, MA, USA Abstract An attempt is made to gain a general understanding of how referential hierarchy phenom- ena work morphosyntactically. Languages with and without morphological case turn out to adopt rather different strategies for dealing with the demands that referential hierarchies place on their clause structure. An investigation of Kashmiri (with morphological case) and North- ern Tiwa (without case) indicates that at least two factors influence the morphosyntactic man- ifestation of hierarchy phenomena: a structural association that appears to exist between ref- erential features of clitics and agreement and inflectional structure on the one hand, and the competing demands on inflectional structure from Nominative agreement vs. high ranking referential features on the other. A consideration of these two factors contributes to an under- standing of why certain hierarchy phenomena take the form they do, why different strategies are used in different types of languages to avoid violations of the hierarchy, and the role that morphological case marking can play in hierarchy phenomena. © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Case; Features; Hierarchy; Kashmiri; Tense; Tiwa Portions of this paper were presented at the Workshop on the Effects of Morphological Case, August 1998 at the Utrecht Institute of Linguistics, Utrecht University, and at the University of Pennsylvania, February 2000. I am grateful to the Workshop organizers, as well as to both sets of audiences for valu- able comments, especially Denis Bouchard, Joan Maling, Alec Marantz, and Carson Schiitze, to Ken Hale for ongoing discussion of these issues, and to three reviewers of an earlier version of this research for their exlremely helpful comments. I am indebted to Gulrukh Ahanger for Kashmiri judgments. * Phone: +1 617-495-8107; Fax: 617-496-4447; E-mail: nichols@fas.harvard.edu 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: S0024-3841 (00)00038-3 516 L Nwhols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 I. Introduction 'Referential hierarchy', 'person hierarchy', 'animacy hierarchy', 'participant hier- archy', 'topic hierarchy', and 'empathy hierarchy' are various names that have been given to phenomena involving a ranking of argument properties and the morphosyn- tactic consequences of this ranking. 'Person hierarchy' is probably the most common term (though not necessarily the most accurate), in reflection of the fact that the phe- nomenon is often recognizable through the behavior of morphology containing spec- ifications for person. Despite the fact that person (or referential) hierarchy phenom- ena have been attested in many languages and language families crosslinguistically, and despite numerous accounts of the phenomena in specific languages (e.g. Zwicky, 1977; Allen and Frantz, 1978; Delancy, 1981; Gerdts, 1988; Macaulay, 1992; Jelinek, 1993; Dixon, 1994; Nash, 1995; Fabri, 1996; Lakamper and Wunderlich, 1998, to name only a few), referential hierarchies and how they operate morphosyn- tactically remain little understood: how are higher and lower ranking properties of arguments actually 'compared' in the morphosyntax of a clause? Since constraints sensitive to the argument hierarchy usually manifest themselves in the rearrangement of clausal morphosyntax, we might expect to find behind the constraints a mor- phosyntactic means by which argument properties (for example, as features) are compared - or, perhaps instead, compete. Jelinek (1999) provides an elegant characterization of hierarchy phenomena: they are "the morphosyntactic expression of information structure, the way clausal archi- tecture reflects old vs. new information". Generalizing for a moment, a typical ref- erential hierarchy system might include two recognizable rules: (I) Argument fea- tures are given a relative ranking, e.g. 1 st person > 2nd person > 3rd person animate > 3rd person inanimate, ~ and (II) Object person must not outrank subject person. What is interesting is that languages with these same rules will vary in how the rules are actually carried out morphosyntactically, as well as in how conflicts between Rule I and Rule II (i.e., violations of Rule II) are resolved. Explanations for referen- tial hierarchy rules have targeted specific languages; the net result is a feeling that a true understanding of the general phenomenon still eludes us. One sign of this lack of understanding is that while the particulars of referential hierarchy systems vary from language to language, we have nothing constructive to say about this variation, i.e. why the effects of hierarchy constraints on clause structure are not uniform, nor has anything been said yet about the similarities that referential hierarchies do show, t The ranking of referential properties in many languages takes into account number; this aspect has been ignored here because the hierarchy phenomena in the two languages to be discussed here are not sensitive to number, and this omission of simplification clarifies the issues somewhat. In addition, while many referential hierarchy phenomena are sensitive to properties of lexical NPs such as topicality and animacy that may increase or decrease the referentiality of an argument, we limit the discussion to the upper end of the hierarchy, the person features, again for the sake of simplicity. Languages with hierar- chy phenomena often differ from each other in the way they encode 3rd person and NP arguments (note that definiteness and topicality are a property of only some of these arguments, unlike the presupposed 1st and 2nd person arguments), hence it may be precisely here that the functional key to the hierarchy phenomenon lies. L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 517 i.e. why the constraints appear to apply in large part to agreement and clitics, and only more rarely to independent pronouns (evidence for this observation will be dis- cussed in Section 3.1). Nor do we have any systematic understanding of why lan- guages resort to different methods to resolve conflicts in the hierarchy rules. We also find what appear to be blatant violations of the referential hierarchy constraint, for example as in the Kashmiri sentences in (9) below, for which the traditional formu- lation (e.g. Rule I and Rule II above) provides no explanation. Finally, there are indi- cations that there are other requirements of the grammar that may compete with the referential hierarchy requirements (one of these will be discussed in the present study); here again we find that we lack sufficient knowledge of how referential hier- archy systems work to understand how and why hierarchy requirements interact with other grammatical constraints. In this study we attempt to make the picture a little brighter by addressing three crucial questions: (a) what part of clause structure is responsible for carrying out the referential hierarchy rules, i.e. how are these rules actually implemented in linguistic structure; (b) what types of formal constraints correspond to the more informally stated Rule I and Rule II above; (c) and finally, given the answers to the first two questions, what other types of constraints may interact with referential hierarchies. Once these matters have been made more precise, we may gain a better understand- ing of why languages resolve hierarchy conflicts in the ways they do. We will exam- ine here two referential hierarchy systems, one in a language with morphological case marking on arguments (Kashmiri) and one in a language without morphological case (Picuris). 2 While conflicts arise in both languages between the rules that make up the referential hierarchy constraint, Kashmiri (with case) and Picurfs (without case) each resolve the conflicts in a different manner. Precisely how such conflicts are resolved in languages with and without morphological case will turn out to give us insight into how referential hierarchy phenomena work in the first place. We will see, for example, that at least one set of constraints that referential hierarchies often compete with are Case requirements. One perhaps surprising finding from this comparison between Kashmiri and Picurfs is that the inflectional head Tense turns out to play a central role in the oper- ation of referential hierarchies. Competing rules involving Tense are responsible for the conflicts that arise; how the demands on Tense are resolved determines how the hierarchy conflicts are resolved. We will argue that the two primary formal compo- nents of referential hierarchy phenomena are: (i) the highest ranking person/referen- tial feature is associated or copied to the head of the Tense projection, and (ii) the need to copy the highest ranking feature to Tense competes with the need for the Nominative Case argument (not necessarily the structural subject) to agree with the Tense head. Where there is a conflict between (i) and (ii) in the language with mor- phological case (Kashmiri), the need for Nominative agreement wins, and in the lan- guage without morphological case (Picurfs), the need to copy the higher ranking fea- ture wins. 2 Picurfs belongs to the Northern Tiwa branch of the Tanoan family, spoken in the Pueblo of Picurfs in Northern New Mexico. 518 L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 It should be pointed out that these findings ought to be taken in a particular light. Some referential hierarchy phenomena are fairly clearly structural in nature, others may be governed more by pragmatic and functional factors. (Indeed, all are at basic the reflection of the information structure of the clause.) The present study is aimed at the first type, i.e. the subset of languages in which the manifestation of referential hierarchy phenomena is more structural in aspect. The ideas discussed here are therefore not the whole story, only the beginning. 2. Facts about Kashmiri and Picuris (Northern Tiwa) In this section we present some basic facts about Kashmiri and Picurfs clitics and agreement, as well as describe the complexities of the referential hierarchy phenom- ena in each language and the different problems that they pose. 2.1. Kashmiri Kashmiri is an Indic language with verb-second properties in both main and sub- ordinate clauses, as seen by the placement of the auxiliary in the main clause of (1) and of the verb in the subordinate clause. 3 (1) laRk chu yi yetsha:n ki boy.Nom, be.3sg.M, this wants that 'The boy wants to eat an apple' su kheyi-he: tsu:NTh he eat-Fut-Subj, apple.Acc. (Bhatt, 1994: 82) Kashmiri arguments appear either as independent NPs or as clitics to one of the verbal elements; the clitics may or may not be doubled by lexical NPs/pronouns under a complex set of circumstances, some of which will become relevant later on. There are clitics for subjects and objects as well as indirect objects. In the present tense and other tenses that make use of an auxiliary, the clitics attach to the aux, as in (2a). In other tenses without auxiliaries such as past or future, the clitics attach directly to the finite verb itself, as in (2b). (2) a. (bi) chu - s - as kita:b diva:n (lsg.Nom.) be - lsg.Nom. - 3sg.Dat. book giving 'I am giving her a book' (Wali and Koul, 1997: 252) b. me dits - is kita:b lsg.Erg gave -3sg.Dat. book 'I gave her a book' (Wali and Koul, 1997: 252) 3 Bhatt and Yoon (1992) argue that there are two Comp positions in the Kashmiri clause, hence the subordinate clause verb in (1) occupies the lower Comp position. L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 519 The order of these clitics is always the same and is based on grammatical relation: subject first, then object, then indirect object, (3). 4 These Kashmiri clitics carry per- son, number and - importantly for our purposes - Case information. All arguments, including full NPs, bear morphological case in Kashmiri (though the fact that all Kashmiri arguments are case-marked is significant, full NPs will generally be ignored here in favor of clitics since the referential hierarchy interactions under dis- cussion are observed best via the latter). (3) Order of Kashmiri clitic pronouns Subject - Object - Indirect object chu - s - an - av be - lsg.Nom. - 3sg.Acc. - 2pl.Dat. 'I am having him wash clothes for you' palav chal -ina:v - a:n clothes wash - cause - pres.part (Hook and Koul, 1984: 129) A final property of Kashmiri case-marking relevant here is the fact that Kashmiri, like many Indic languages, shows a case split along tense lines. In non-past clauses, subjects are Nominative and objects are Accusative. In past clauses, however, while the argument clitics appear in the same order, subjects are Ergative and objects are Nominative. Examples (4a) (present) and (4b) (past) illustrate this case/tense split. (4) a. chu -s -ath yo:r an -a:n be - lsg.Nom. - 2sg.Acc. here bring - pres.part 'I am bringing you here' b. onu - m - akh yo :r brought - lsg.Erg. - 2sg.Nom. here 'I brought you here (Hook and Koul, 1984: 128) As for the operation of the referential hierarchy in Kashmiri, the hierarchy con- straint can essentially be boiled down to two informal rules, (5): given (a) a ranking of person features such that 1st person outranks 2nd person, which in turn outranks 3rd person, then (b) object person must not outrank subject person. (5) Kashmiri Referential Hierarchy Constraint a. 1 st person > 2nd person > 3rd person b. Object person must not outrank subject person Example (6) illustrates a clause whose arguments are in accordance with the hier- archy constraint in (5). (6) chu - s - ath parina:v - a:n be - lsg.Nom. - 2sg.Acc. teach - pres.part 'I am teaching you' (Wali and Koul, 1994: 983) 4 Except m the case of a Dative subject clitic, which follows the Nominative object clitic (Wali and Koul, 1997: 253). 520 L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 Compare this with what happens when the person features of subject and object do not conform to the referential hierarchy constraint. As can be seen in (7), when the object is the higher ranking argument (here lsg.), instead of being marked with the expected Accusative case, the direct object receives an unexpected Dative case marking. The possibility of a 2nd person subject and 1st person object iff the 1st per- son object is marked Dative implies that Dative case somehow renders the 1 st per- son argument 'invisible' with respect to the hierarchy constraint. (7) chu - h - am be - 2sg.Nom. - lsg.Dat, teach 'You are teaching me' parina:v - a:n - pres.part (Wall and Koul, 1994: 977) Notice that the examples given so far for Kashmiri have all been in the present tense. If we take a look how the person hierarchy in Kashmiri operates in the past tense, we see a very different effect. First compare a non-past and a past clause with identical arguments that conform to the person hierarchy. In (8a) and (8b) can be seen the case split conditioned by the difference in tense. The non-past clause is Nominative/Accusative and the past clause is Ergative/Nominative. (8) a. chu - s - ath parina:v be - lsg.Nom. - 2sg.Acc. teach 'I am teaching you' b. onu - m - akh yo:r brought - lsg.Erg. - 2sg.Nom. here 'I brought you here' - a:n - pres.part (Wali and Koul, 1994: 983) (Hook and Koul, 1984: 128) In contrast, (9) illustrates what happens when argument person features do not conform to the hierarchy constraint. The readjustment of object case-marking to Dative that we have already seen in non-past clauses like (7) repeated as (9a) might suggest that some kind of case readjustment to Dative would also be in order for past objects. But in fact, in the past tense clause in (9b) the case of both 2nd sg. subject and 1st sg. object remain the same here as in the past clause in (8b), where the per- son features of the arguments do not violate the hierarchy constraint. (9) a. chu - h - am parina:v be - 2sg.Nom. - lsg.Dat, teach 'You are teaching me' b. vuchu -th -as saw - 2sg.Erg. - lsg.Nom. 'You saw me' - a:n - pres.part (Wali and Koul, 1994: 977) (Wali and Koul, 1994: 983) The problem at this point may be broken down into two questions to be addressed separately. First, why the switch to Dative case in Kashmiri where the referential hierarchy constraint would appear to be violated? And second, why the switch to L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 521 Dative case in such contexts only in the non-past and not in the past? The first ques- tion suggests in addition the broader question of why case marking should be involved in hierarchy phenomena at all. 2.2. Picurfs Picurfs is a Tanoan language of the Southwestern United States, and, like other Tanoan languages, is highly polysynthetic. In addition to the possibility of noun, verb and even quantifier incorporation, the verb stem may contain aspectual and negation affixes as well as tense and obligatory agreement inflection (not all of these combinations are illustrated here). (10) a. xommo ko - phia exhort. 2sg.subj./3.Cobj - fire 'You must go out to look for fire' b. 'o - poha - w! 3sg.subj./3.Cobj - all - tooth 'He broke all his teeth' - n9 - wole - look.for - go.out (Harrington and Roberts, 1929: 364) - thou - break (Harrington and Roberts, 1929: 382) Every Picurfs verb will bear a prefix containing information regarding the per- son, number and class of the subject, object and indirect object if present. All of this information for subject and object(s) is contained in a single portmanteau morpheme, as with mctpi for lsg.subj, and 2pl.obj. in (1 l) below. Some discus- sions of this type of language treat this complex as a clitic because of its position on the stem, others as an agreement affix because of its obligatory nature; we will assume the latter, although nothing particularly crucial relies on this assumption here. (11) hoke - yo ~atthoi mopi - xWia'~n - hu thus - emph. today lsg.subj./2pl.obj. - call - past.imperf. 'That is why I am calling you today' (Harrington and Roberts, 1928: 384) Under certain discourse/pragmatic conditions, NP arguments may be dropped, leaving only the pronominal agreement prefix to identify arguments, (12a); this typically occurs in cases where the NP has an established referent or is a topic. 1 st and 2nd person pronominal agreement are ordinarily doubled by free pronouns (indicating only person) only under conditions of emphasis or contrastive focus, (12b). (12) a. 'i - 'o~o - n'aih~n 3pl.subj./3sg.obj. - meet - subord. 'When they met him' (Harrington and Roberts, 1928: 364) b. h~x~yo '~ ko -wa -tO -'~m -m~ why 2 2sg.subj - neg. - speaking - do - pres.imperf. 'Why do you not speak?' (Harrington and Roberts, 1928: 384) 522 L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 In contrast to Kashmiri, Picurfs arguments do not bear any morphological case marking, (13). The information contained in the agreement prefix is the sole source of information with regard to the grammatical function of an argument) NPs that are semantically adjuncts are contained within phrases headed by postpositions, such as the postposition pa 'by' used to mark the agent phrase in the passive (14), about which more will be said below. (13) toxwia - lote hi:ue - n¢ l~:t/¢ coyote - old.man stone - sg. bite 'Old Coyote bit the stone' (Harrington and Roberts, 1928: 382) (14) ka:len¢ pa ti:uen¢ p'lmma: - kwil 'ol - ia wolf by woman mountain -toward take -passive 'The wolf took the woman up to the mountains' (Harrington and Roberts, 1928: 354) Even from this brief sketch it can be seen that Kashmiri and Picurfs belong to two quite different language types. Now, like Kashmiri, Picurfs also manifests referential hierarchy effects; these effects are realized somewhat differently, however. As in other Tanoan languages (cf. Hale, 1972; Allen and Frantz, 1978), Picurfs syntax is constrained by two rules such that (a) 1st and 2nd person outrank 3rd person (lst and 2rid person are not ranked relative to one another), and (b) object person must not outrank subject person. 6 (15) Picurfs Referential Hierarchy Constraint a. 1st, 2nd person > 3rd person b. Object person must not outrank subject person Unlike Kashmiri, when object person outranks subject person in Picurfs, transitive clauses are not possible. Instead in this circumstance a passive construction is used, so that the higher ranking patient argument is the subject of the passive and the lower ranking agent argument is inside a postpositional phrase headed by pa 'by'. Example (16) illustrates the type of construction necessary with, for example, a 3rd person agent and a 2nd person patient. (16) [ta:kolo: - tote pa mon] - ho:p giant - old by 2sg.nom. - chase '[The old giant] is going to chase you' - ia - he - pass. - immed.future (Harrington and Roberts, 1928: 328) 5 For certain feature complexes, e.g. case of 3sg.Asubj. and 3sg.subj./3sg.Cobj. as in examples (13) and (14), the prefix is O. 6 The statement in (15) is not quite the full story: more topical outranks less topical, more animate out- ranks less animate, but (15) is a useful simplification for understanding the basic mechanics of how such systems work. L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 523 Thus the Picur/s solution to resolving a violation of the hierarchy constraint is quite different from the Kashmiri solution: Kashmiri retains the transitive structure and changes the case on the higher ranking object argument from Accusative to Dative, while Picurfs forms an intransitive predicate in order to place the lower rank- ing agent argument inside a PP. The question that must be asked, of course, is which of the two structural elements of (16) is the one that ultimately circumvents the hierarchy violation, the promotion of the higher ranking patient to subject or the placement of the lower ranking agent inside a PP. By the traditional manner of stating hierarchy constraints according to grammatical relations as in (5b) and (15b), it would appear that promotion of the highest ranking argument to subject is what does the trick. Monoclausal examples like (16) are deceptive in this respect, however. When we look at a biclausal example like that in (17) below, we come up with a different view of the phenomenon. (17) [cP howfn hfxf6i k~tn~tn-t~n-tol-en~ pa wa but why ldu.dat/A.-father-old-sg, by emph. [cP '~tn-'ita-t'f-~i-'e ] wa-miau-me] lpl.subj./B.obj.-willow-cut-irreal.-nom, neg.-want-pres.imperf. 'Why doesn't our grandfather want us to cut the willows?' (Harrington and Roberts, 1929: 316) In this example, the subject of the main clause is 3rd person kqnqntttntoten¢ 'our grandfather', and the subject of the subordinate clause is 1st person '~/n- 'we (dual)'. Note first that despite the fact that the 3rd person and 1st person arguments are in different clauses, the 3rd person main clause argument appears inside a PP marked with pa 'by', a sign that the hierarchy constraint is operative here, Equally surpris- ing, neither the 3rd person main clause argument nor 1 st person subordinate clause argument appears in a passive construction. In addition, note that the hierarchy con- straint is applying in (17) to two subject arguments, an indication that the statement of the constraint in (15b) in terms of grammatical relations is not quite right. This cross-clausal application of the hierarchy constraint tells us that it is the PP around the 3rd person argument in (16) and (17), not the passive promotion of a higher ranking patient, that prevents a violation of the referential hierarchy con- straint. While we now have a better understanding of the form the clause takes to avoid a hierarchy violation in Picurfs (and perhaps the other Tanoan languages as well), we are left with at least two further questions: why does placing the lower ranking object inside a PP prevent a hierarchy violation, and why should the hierar- chy constraint apply across a clause boundary? To these questions may be added the larger question that sums up the discussion in this section, namely why languages adopt different solutions to avoid violations of the hierarchy constraint: why does Picuris (with no morphological case) put a lower ranking argument into a PP, and why does Kashmiri (with morphological case) put the higher ranking argument into Dative case? In order to address these questions directly, we now turn to a discussion of the syntactic basis of referential hierarchy phenomena. 524 L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 3. The syntactic basis of referential hierarchy phenomena In this section, an attempt is made to clarify the syntactic underpinnings of refer- ential hierarchy phenomena and a proposal is put forth concerning how hierarchy phenomena are implemented in clause structure. The Tense projection turns out to play a central role in hierarchy phenomena, and as a result, hierarchy phenomena interact with other phenomena involving Tense such as subject agreement and Nom- inative Case. A closer examination of Kashmiri and Picurfs reveals that languages with morphological case resolve these competing demands on Tense in favor of Case, while languages with no morphological case resolve conflicts involving Tense in favor of the referential hierarchy. 3.1. The role of tense An important property of the hierarchy phenomena discussed in this paper, and as far as we know, of all such hierarchy phenomena, is that they are manifested in lan- guages and contexts where person features appear as agreement or clitics and not where person features appear in the form of independent pronouns only. 7 Davis (1998) along with Chomsky (1998, 1999) and other recent work suggest that agree- ment features, including person features, are not located in the head of their own Agr projection but instead are located on the Tense head. 8 Similarly, several have sug- gested (e.g. Rouveret, 1988; Pollock, 1989; Laka, 1990) that clitics are licensed by Tense; this can be seen in the behavior of clitics that climb out of non-finite clauses to the tensed verb, as well as in the absence of cliticization with certain past partici- ples which are thought to lack Tense. Since agreement and clitics are both associated with the head of the Tense pro- jection, it makes sense to hypothesize that Tense (as an inflectional head) may play a role in referential hierarchies. Some quite striking evidence for the relationship between Tense and referential hierarchy phenomena comes from the behavior of cli- tics vs. independent pronouns in Southern Paiute, a Uto-Aztecan language (data from Sapir, 1930). The two sets of Southern Paiute pronouns are in complementary distribution and doubling apparently does not occur. Southern Paiute clitics are 7 More precisely, weak (but not strong) pronouns may possibly manifest hierarchy effects; see note 11. We assume for now that this condition is uni-directional (person features must appear as agreement/cli- tics to show hierarchy effects); it would be extremely interesting to find out from further research whether the condition is bi-directional, i.e. whether all clitics and agreement show some sort of person hierarchy effect. The only exception to this generalization we know of (there may be more) is the fol- lowing case in Kashmiri where a (lst person) independent (strong) pronoun object bears the Dative case associated with hierarchy effects in that language (though note that Kashmiri does at least contain cli- tics; we know of no languages possessing only independent pronouns that violate this generalization). (i) sali:m chu yatsha:n me ba:gas.manz vuch-un Salim be wanting lsg.Dat, garden-in see-inf.neut. 'Salim wants to see me in the garden' (Wali and Koul, 1997: 46) 8 Cf, along these lines Avrutin (1994) among others for the relationship between referential features and inflectional projections in reflexives. L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 525 subject to a hierarchy constraint that determines the order in which they appear fol- lowing the tensed auxiliary, (18a). 9 Some possible clitic combinations are illustrated in (18b--d). (18) a. Order of Southern Paiute clitic pronominals: AUX - 3rd person - 2nd person - 1st person b. -0w~-rff 2pl.- 1 sg. c. -~tmi-m 3pl.anim.vis.- 1.sg. d. -aq:a-0wY 3inanim.invis.-2pl. The order of the independent pronouns on the other hand is determined entirely by grammatical function. Subject always precedes object, regardless of person fea- tures or the position of the verb, as illustrated in (19). ~° (19) a. b. Subj. Obj. imi niniA pAxq0'u-mpa:n-:iA you me kill-fut.-prtcl. 'You will kill me' Subj. Obj. ni' paxqa'rju-0umwi mwirnwi'A I kill-you.pl, you (pl.obj.) 'I will kill you' The contrast is revealing: Southern Paiute clitics, which are hypothesized to be structurally associated with the head of the Tense projection, show referential hier- archy effects while the independent pronouns, which have no structural association with the head of the Tense projection show no such effects, i~ On the strength of this observation, namely that person features show hierarchy effects when the features are structurally associated with Tense, referential hierarchy constraints may be made formally explicit in the following way. The proposal in (20) holds for Kashmiri and Picurfs (see Sections 3.2 and 3.3), and, we suspect, for many other languages involving hierarchy phenomena. (20) Feature Hierarchy Constraint a. Highest ranking argument (person/referential) feature associates to Tense. 9 A few violations of this order occur at a superficial level (e.g., as portmanteau morphemes), due to irregularities of spell-out rules. ~0 Southern Paiute appears to be a verb-f'mal language, and apparently the verb can also move to some initial position, possibly C ° . ~ See Cardinaletti and Starke (1994) for arguments that independent/strong pronouns carry their own functional structure. 526 L. Nichols I Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 b. Nominative argument 12 (person/referential) feature copies to Tense in spec- head agreement. c. Tense may only contain one set of features. d. Where the Nominative argument does not possess the highest ranking fea- ture: Either (i) the presence of (person/referential) features previously associ- ated with Tense from another source blocks Nominative agree- ment, or (ii) Nominative agreement blocks person/referential features from being associated with Tense from another source. Some comments on (20) are in order. First, we assume that (20a) is a result of the independently motivated association between clitics/agreement and Tense: the argu- ment features of elements in this configuration are structurally accessible to Tense (more on this point will be said below). (20a) indicates that the highest ranking per- son/referential feature becomes associated with T from anywhere in the (non- oblique) structure of the clause, i.e. regardless of the grammatical relation of the argument that bears it. In other words, unlike traditional formulations of the con- straint like (Sb) and (15b) above there is no need to mention in the hierarchy con- straint the grammatical relation of the argument bearing the highest ranking fea- ture. 13 (20b) is likewise not special to the hierarchy constraint but rather describes the standard specifier-head structural relation between an NP and Tense that results in Nominative Case assignment to the NP. (20b) is a crucial aspect of hierarchy phe- nomena, however, since this more general requirement of the grammar sets up a con- flict with respect to copying other features to Tense. This conflict is described by (20c) and (20d). For some reason Tense may only contain one set of features; either this is simply a formal property of Tense, or pre- sumably Nominative argument agreement and 'highest ranking person/referential agreement' are somehow equivalent in a way that we do not yet understand. Either way, option (i) in (20d) may result from the nature of syntactic derivation. If we assume that syntactic structures are derived bottom up, the higher ranking feature - which happens to be associated with an argument incorporated into the structure ear- lier than the Nominative argument/argument in the specifier of TP - associates to Tense first and blocks any subsequent NP agreement with Tense. Option (ii) may reflect that the need for Nominative Case to be assigned (which is part and parcel of 12 This argument is most often (though not always) the subject. t3 On the other hand, it remains difficult to make explicit how exactly 'highest ranking feature' is determined in the grammar (e.g., the relative ranking between say 1st person and 2nd person); some sort of syntactic sensitivity to the more highly referential (Silverstein, 1976's 'maximally presupposable') argument is a possibility. Perhaps the roles of 1st and 2nd person as shifters/variables entails the auto- matic associanon of these features to specific places in the functional structure of the clause (cf. Tsoulas and Kural (1999) for a possible suggestion compatible with this view), from which they may be copied to Tense. We leave this latter aspect of the problem aside for now for future clarification. L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 527 spec - head agreement) is so strong in a language that it prevents any higher ranking feature from being associated with Tense from another source. While the comparison of subject vs. object features is usually considered an intrinsic part of referential hierarchy phenomena in their traditional formulations, we see from (20) that direct comparison of grammatical relations is not a necessary part of the hierarchy constraint. The traditional statement 'object person must not out rank subject person' is recast as competition between two rules: association of the highest ranking feature referential to Tense and Nominative agreement with Tense. In fact, languages may appear to violate the traditional 'object person must not out rank subject person' rule depending on how the competition induced by (20c) is resolved. As for the two languages under discussion here, Picurfs (without morphological case) chooses option (i), while Kashmiri (with case) chooses option (ii). The follow- ing sections examine how the presence vs. absence of morphological case in a lan- guage is related to the particular strategy used to resolve conflicts in the rules mak- ing up the hierarchy constraint. 3.2. Morphological case and the resolution of hierarchy conflicts The Feature Hierarchy Constraint in (20) represents our hypothesis, namely that referential hierarchy phenomena are the result of competing demands on Tense, the need for the highest ranking person/referential feature to be associated with Tense vs. the need for the argument in the specifier of the Tense Phrase to agree with Tense and have its Case (usually Nominative) licensed by Tense. A second look at Picurfs and Kashmiri reveals that the absence of morphological case in a language is corre- lated with satisfaction of the requirements of person/referential features, whereas the presence of morphological case appears to determine that the demands on Tense are weighted in favor of Case requirements. We begin with Kashmiri. The morphological case an argument bears can be an indication of the structural association between that argument and Tense. As a result, morphological case may be manipulated in order to prevent features from being associated with Tense. Recall that in a Kashmiri present tense clause a higher rank- ing object argument bore unexpected Dative case (21a), instead of the expected Accusative case, (2 lb); in contrast, in a Kashmiri past clause a higher ranking object argument retained its original nominative case, (22). (21) a. chu - h - am parina:v be - 2sg.Nom. - lsg.Dat, teach 'You are teaching me' b. chu - s - ath parina:v be - lsg.Nom. - 2sg.Ac¢. teach 'I am teaching you' (22) vuchu - th - as saw - 2sg.Erg. - lsg.Nom. 'You saw me' - a:n - pres.part (Wali and Koul, 1994: 977) - a:n - pres.part (Wali and Koul, 1994: 983) (Wali and Koul, 1994: 983) 528 L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 Most recent work on the structural Cases in the Principles and Parameters tradi- tion assumes that these are licensed by functional projections; in early minimalist work (e.g., Chomsky, 1993) the structural Cases were licensed in the specifier of the (subject and object) Agreement projections. In more recent work, it is proposed that Tense licenses structural Nominative Case in its specifier, and v, the head of the functional projection containing transitive VP, licenses structural Accusative Case (Chomsky, 1998, 1999) in its specifier. Since (transitive) verbs in Kashmiri move from v through T on their way to C in both main and subordinate clauses (cf. Bhatt and Yoon, 1992; Bhatt, 1999), Kashmiri Accusative Case also has a structural asso- ciation with the Tense projection. This aspect of Kashmiri will be important for understanding the phenomenon in (21a) and (22). Recall that we have already suggested in Section 3.1 that the person features of agreement and clitics are structurally associated with Tense. There is at least one condition, however, on this association between person features and Tense: in order for person features to have a structural relation to Tense, it follows that they must belong to an argument that has a structural relation to Tense. An argument bears a structural relation to Tense if its Case is structurally related to Tense, like structural Nominative Case crosslinguistically, as well as structural Accusative Case in Kash- miri. Non-structural case marking like Dative indicates that an argument has no structural relation to the Tense projection; person features on these arguments like- wise will have no structural relation to Tense. Note in this light that Dative subjects in Kashmiri cannot trigger gender agreement with the verb; such agreement is instead with the Nominative argument if present or a default masculine 3sg. agree- ment, (23). (23) me chu yi-va:n lsg.Dat.(F) be.3.sg.M, come-pres.prt. 'I am being taught by him' t~m's4nd-i dos' patina: v-n4 3sg.-Gen.-Abl. by teach-inf.-Abl. (Wali and Koul, 1997: 208) A similar effect of non-structural Case on agreement features is found in Icelandic. Lexical case on an argument in Icelandic blocks verb agreement with that argument (Andrews, 1990). Jelinek (1999) describes hierarchy effects for Goal arguments in certain languages that show a preference for the use of structural Case for the higher ranking Goal NP. Interestingly, among languages that have what she calls Dative Hierarchies there are two different strategies for having a Goal argument bear structural Case, (a) assign- ment of structural instead of non-structural morphological case, or (b) the use of a Dative Shift construction. In Warlpiri, for example, 1st and 2nd person Goal pronominal arguments obligatorily bear (structural) Accusative Case, while 3rd per- son Goal pronominal arguments bear (non-structural) Dative Case. In Lummi, on the other hand, with certain verb roots animate Goals are obligatorily promoted in the syntax to Direct Object, and the inanimate (lower ranking) argument bears an oblique marker. Evidence such as this suggests that structural Case plays an impor- tant role in referential hierarchy phenomena, an indication that we may not be wrong to look for a morphosyntactic basis behind these phenomena. L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 529 With the notion that the type of case marking indicates the presence or absence of a structural association between an argument (and its person features) and Tense, we can make sense of the Kashmiri pattern of case in past and non-past clauses in the following manner. Part (20a) of the Feature Hierarchy Constraint (FHC) dictates that the 1st person feature on the object in example (21a) would ordinarily associate to Tense. Part (20b) of the FHC describes the regular verb agreement that occurs along with Nominative Case licensing; this agreement involves copying the 2nd person feature of the subject in example (21a) to Tense. Tense may only bear one set of fea- tures (FHC (20c)), and in Kashmiri the result in example (21a) is that the lower rank- ing 2nd person Nominative subject agrees with Tense and retains its structural Case, while the higher ranking 1st person object argument is assigned a non-structural Case, namely Dative. From the fact that Nominative agreement with Tense wins out over copying a higher ranking feature to Tense from elsewhere in the clause, we can deduce that the Case requirement is stronger than the person feature requirement in Kashmiri. By (20c) of the FHC, the presence of the higher ranking 1st person feature on the object would block Nominative argument agreement, and Kashmiri does not permit this: the Nominative argument must always win. We might link the relative strength of the Nominative Case/agreement requirement to the presence in Kashmiri of morphological case - since we find the opposite situation in Picurls where there is no morphological case - although it is not clear exactly what property of morpho- logical case this requirement derives from. The distribution of non-structural Dative as a last resort strategy also derives from this Nominative agreement requirement. For this reason, for example, we do not find Dative on lower ranking Kashmiri sub- jects in contexts like (21a): while non-structural Dative on the subject would prevent 2nd person feature copy to Tense and allow the I st person object feature to associ- ate to Tense, the Nominative/agreement requirement would not be fulfilled in such a structure. 14 As for the absence of any case alternations in the Kashmiri past clause, it is instructive to note that some have argued that Ergative is a non-structural case (e.g. Jelinek, 1993; Nash, 1995). As in Hindi (24) and in many other languages, Ergative arguments often fail to agree with the verb despite being structural subjects; instead the Nominative-marked object will trigger verbal agreement. (24) m~i ne Top-i: Dh~D-i: lsg.(M) Erg. hat-F.sg, look.for-3sg.F. 'I looked for a hat' If the Ergative marking in (22) reflects non-structural Case, the lower ranking 2nd person feature on the Ergative subject argument in this Kashmiri past example has no structural relation to Tense. On the other hand, the object argument bearing struc- tural Nominative Case is structurally associated to Tense, therefore its higher 14 Presumably Dative is prevented from appearing on objects in transitive constructions where it is not needed (contexts that are not apparent violations of the informal hierarchy constraint in (15)) by some principle of economy such that the structural Case property of v is always utilized when possible. 530 L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 ranking 1st person feature is already associated with Tense. Because non-structural Ergative blocks subject agreement, no clash arises in the past clause between Nomi- native argument agreement with Tense and the association of the highest ranking person features with Tense; in (22) these two demands are met by the same argu- ment, the object. As a result, the introduction here of other (non-structural) cases such as Dative is not required, t5 A question may be raised for the conclusion that feature association is not possi- ble from non-structural case Dative and Ergative arguments in light of the fact that both Dative and Ergative arguments may be clitics (and therefore by hypothesis related to Tense). Some interesting support for the proposal that the non-structural case clitics are different comes from doubling evidence. While Kashmiri Nominative and Accusative clitics can be doubled by pronouns and NPs, Dative and Ergative cli- tics are in complementary distribution with independent pronouns/NPs (Wali and Koul, 1994, 1997), suggesting a structural difference between the two types of Kash- mir clitics. 16 (25) a. me vod (*-urn) lsg.Erg, cry (-lsg.Erg.) 'I cried' b. me dits (*-is) tomis kita:b lsg.Erg, gave(-3sg.Dat.) her.Dat, book 'I gave her a book' (Wali and Koul, 1997: 224) (Wali and Koul, 1997: 252) contrast: c. bi chu - s - an - ay su tse lsg.Nom, be - lsg.Nom. - 3sg.Acc. - 2sg.Dat. 3sg.Acc. 2sg.Dat. hava: li kara: n hand.over doing 'I am handing him over to you' (Wali and Koul, 1997: 253) Finally, the Kashmid examples in (21a) and (22) point tko an important contrast between the traditional formulation of referential hierarchy phenomena as in (5) and the proposals made here. In its traditional formulation both (21a) and (22) are viola- tions of the referential hierarchy constraint: object person outranks subject person. Lak~imper and Wunderlich (1998) propose a constraint-based account of a hierarchy phenomenon in Quechua that allows for constraints to be violated as a property of the phenomenon. We have argued, however, that hierarchy phenomena are simply the result of the competition of features from two different sources, Nominative argument vs. highest ranking person feature. (21a) and (22) each involve features z5 Unlike Dative, Ergative is not a last-resort strategy since this is the expected case marking for sub- jects in Kashmiri past clauses. t6 2nd person clitics are always obligatory in Kashmiri so that doubling here with Dative and Erganve is possible, though this appears to be a quite different phenomenon. L. Nichols / Lmgua 111 (2001) 515-537 531 associated to Tense from a single source: there is no feature association from the Dative argument in the present (21a) or from the Ergative argument in the past (22). Thus (21a) and (22), instead of constituting violations or counterexamples to the hierarchy rule, reveal the nature of the phenomenon. 3.3. The absence of morphological case and the primao' of person features Picurfs applies a different solution to the conflict between Nominative agreement and higher ranking person features. Recall that in Picurfs where the person feature of a structurally lower argument (e.g., object or subordinate subject in certain contexts) outranks that of a structurally higher argument (subject or superordinate subject), Picuris avoids a clash between the competing demands of the hierarchy rule by plac- ing the structurally higher argument inside a PP, (26). (26) [ta:kolo: - fole pa] mon - ho:p - ia - h~ [giant - old by] 2sg.nom. - chase - pass. - future ['The old giant] is going to chase you' (Harrington and Roberts, 1928: 328) In (26), the passive rule is applied in connection with this strategy. In (17) repeated below as (27), the superordinate subject is simply placed inside a PP with no morphosyntactic consequences for the matrix verb. (27) [cP howCn h~x¢~i k~n~tn-t~n-tol-en~ pawa but why ldu.dat/A.-father-oid-sg, by [cP '~[n-'ita-t'g-~i-'e ] wa-miau-m¢ ] lpl.subj./B.obj.-willow-cut-irreal.-nom, neg.-want-pres.imperf. 'Why doesn't our grandfather want us to cut the willows?' (Harrington and Roberts, 1928: 316) The argument inside a PP bears no thematic relation to the argument structure of the verb, hence the PP is not indexed in the pronominal agreement prefix of the verb in (26) or (27). The effect with respect to the FHC is to remove one of the two com- peting demands for feature association with Tense. In (26) only a single themati- cally-related argument remains whose features may be associated with Tense, and this is the argument with the higher ranking person feature. The introduction of the PP has the same effect in (27), resolving the conflicting demands of the FHC in this case across a clause boundary (we return to this example below). The fact that Picurfs lacks morphological case on its arguments may be connected to the way in which it resolves the competition between features with respect to Tense. Because it lacks morphological case, Picurfs does not have the option of assigning non-structural Case to an argument to prevent feature association to Tense (as in Kashmiri). Rather, the only option in such a language to remove an argument from a direct structural relation with Tense is to remove it from any thematic rela- tion with the verb. Picurfs does this by placing the argument inside a PP. It appears that because Picurfs lacks morphological case, the requirement for Nominative 532 L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 argument agreement is less strong here so that Picurfs will always choose to place a lower ranking subject argument inside a PP. The result of this strategy in Picurfs is that the argument with the higher ranking person feature will always succeed in associating to Tense. This contrasts with the Kashmiri strategy of sometimes affect- ing the higher ranking argument so that it will not be able to associate to Tense. We predict that this PP strategy and its result with respect to the association of person features will be found both in Picurfs and other polysynthetic languages, for which Baker (1996) has argued that thematically related NPs are adjuncts coreferential with pro in the actual argument positions of the clause, as well as in non-polysynthetic languages where NPs lack morphological case but themselves occupy the argument positions of the clause. Finally, returning to the long-distance manifestation of the FHC in example (27), the appearance of the PP in the matrix clause of (27) is problematic for the tradi- tional statements of referential hierarchy constraints in terms of the comparison of grammatical relations, since two subject arguments are in competition here. If, how- ever, the hierarchy constraint involves competing demands on Tense, then (27) is the expected result. Note first that the FHC does not always apply across a clause boundary, (28). There is something special about the example in (27) that allows it. (28) te:to'o - n¢ tQ: - hu ho 'a - ya - so - t'a: grandmother - sg. say-imperf, thus 2.dual.subj - neg - fut. -do - pQ -'a - neg.imper. -emph. '[Their] grandmother said "You must not do this"' (Harrington and Roberts, 1928: 352) We can do more than simply claim that (27) is a restructuring context (two clauses reinterpreted syntactically as a single clause), however. In contrast to (28), the subordinate clause in (27) is marked with irrealis -(i. Stowell (1982) provides several syntactic arguments that Infl (Tense) moves to Comp in irrealis infinitival complements in English) 7 We assume the same type of covert movement occurs in Picurfs irrealis complements. If agreement features are parasitic on Tense and Tense moves to Comp in irrealis complements, this subordinate Tense (and the features it bears) are now in the same syntactic domain as the matrix Tense (and its features). More specifically, according to the Phase Impenetrability Condition (Chomsky, 1998), elements at the edge of a derivational phase (the head of the phase, its speci- fier(s) and any adjoined elements) are visible to the next higher phase for various syntactic operations such as movement (feature copy and pied-piping). (The Phase Impenetrability Condition is intended to capture, for example, the Subjacency Con- dition and explain why wh-movement out of a subordinate SpecCP is possible but wh-movement out of the clause from any position below the subordinate SpecCP m__ ~7 For further syntactic evidence as well semantic motivation for this movement, see Nichols (in prep). L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 533 is not possible.) With respect to (27), once subordinate Tense has moved to Comp of its clause, the agreement features on this Tense are visible to the next higher clause by the Phase Impenetrability Condition. Once these agreement features are visible to the matrix Tense, the Feature Hierarchy Constraint requires that these features must associate to the matrix Tense if they include the highest ranking person feature of that syntactic domain. ~8 The presence in (27) of the 1st person feature on the matrix Tense will then block agreement with a nearby structural subject, so that in order for the single NP kctnqntqntoten~ 'our grandfather' of the matrix clause in (27) to be licensed in the clause without being indexed in the pronominal agreement prefix, the NP agent must be contained with a PP. (29) Long-distance application of the FHC (summary) a. Irrealis Tense moves to Comp. b. Features on complement Tense now in syntactic domain of matrix Tense (by PIC). c. Highest ranking person feature associates to matrix Tense. Instead of being problematic, the operation of the FHC across a clause boundary turns out to provide confirmation that the FHC involves person feature association to Tense, and in addition, is perhaps an additional source of evidence that agreement features are parasitic on the Tense head rather than being located on a separate func- tional head of their own. This long-distance example also supports the hypothesis that the FHC involves competing feature association rules and that the first applica- tion of person feature association to Tense in the derivation - wherever it originates - will block any subsequent feature association to Tense. ~9 4. Conclusion and related issues We have argued that certain aspects of the referential hierarchy phenomena observed crosslinguistically can be understood as the result of the interaction between two competing rules that associate or perhaps copy person/referential fea- tures to the head of the Tense projection. This new understanding of referential hier- archy phenomena has several advantages over the traditional account in which gram- matical relations were thought to play a role. Contrary to the traditional claim, the direct comparison of subject vs. object person features does not drive the phenome- non. Two types of evidence were discussed that indicate that the relative ranking of subject vs. object is not what is at issue: a higher ranking (Nominative) object being 18 One tssue that remains to be resolved is why these person features supposedly associate to Tense but yet are not expressed overtly on the main clause Tense as morphological a~,,reement. We return to this point in Section 4. 19 We might speculate that the 'inverse' affixes found in certain languages where referential hierarchy phenomena are found - e.g. Algonquian languages - may be an extra functional head for one set of per- son features to copy to instead of to Tense, therefore resolving the feature association conflict. 534 L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 favored for association to Tense over a lower ranking (non-structural Case) subject in Kashmiri past clauses, and the application of the hierarchy constraint to two sub- jects across a clause boundary in Picuris. The syntactic approach to referential hier- archy phenomena argued for here also has an advantage over constraint-based approaches to hierarchy phenomena such as that advocated by Lak~imper and Wun- derlich (1998). In their approach, constraints may be violated, violations being inter- preted as indicating the relative ranking of constraints (a violated constraint ranks lower than the one it gives way to). In our approach to the phenomenon, no con- straint is actually ever violated. Feature association rules place conflicting demands on the structure, and one of the rules (e.g., associate highest ranking person feature to Tense) may be blocked by changing the morphosyntax of the clause so that it no longer may apply (e.g., by assigning non-structural Case to the argument). We have also seen that the rule associating person features to the Tense head interacts with other phenomena involving Tense, such as Nominative agreement. With the syntax of referential hierarchies thus made more explicit and role of Tense in the phenome- non recognized, it is hoped that further phenomena involving Tense may be identi- fied which interact with the referential hierarchy rule. The findings of this study also have interesting implications for theories of mor- phological case and the role of case in the grammar. We have compared here lan- guages with and without morphological case that manifest hierarchy phenomena and have shown that these languages differ in the ways in which conflicts between the two feature association rules of the hierarchy constraint are resolved. Kashmiri, with morphological case, resolves the conflict in favor of (Nominative) Case regardless of person features; Picurfs, without case, favors the higher ranking person feature. A single set of rules (some of which derive from independent requirements of the grammar) called the Feature Hierarchy Constraint is able to account for the quite dif- ferent morphosyntactic effects of the person hierarchy for both types of languages. An important question follows from these observations that remains unanswered: why does agreement with the Nominative argument win out over association with the higher ranking referential feature in Kashmiri? In other words, why does the presence of morphological case in a language in effect strengthen the structural Case-licensing requirements? This phenomenon appears to belie the standard assumption that morphological case is a surface phonological manifestation of abstract Case with no impact on the syntax of clause. On the other hand, as a result of the proposals made here we gain insight into the well-known correlation between referential properties and morphological case mark- ing noticed in Silverstein (1976, 1981). There it was recognized that the more the referential value of an argument tended toward the highly referential ('maximally presupposable', e.g. toward 1st person reference) vs. toward the less referential, the more likely the argument would bear a particular case in the former vs. the latter instance. 2° For example, the more highly referential a subject argument, the more likely that argument is to bear Nominative rather than Ergative case, and the more -'" Given the interaction of other variables such as grammatical relation, type of clause linkage, refer- ence-maintenance relation and perhaps also tense. L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 535 highly referential an object argument, the more likely the appearance of Accusative case there. The proposals made in the current study suggest an explanation for this correlation, namely the more highly referential an argument, the greater the need to be associated with a case that is structurally associated with the head of the Tense projection (Nominative or Accusative). 2~ Finally, this study gives rise to a new series of questions, the answers to which may sharpen our understanding of referential hierarchy phenomena even further. For example, why is there a need in these languages for the highest ranking person fea- tures to associate to Tense? A partial answer may be that referential features are associated with Tense because the value of referential variables (pronouns, deter- miners etc.) are determined relative to the utterance time. See Tsoulas and Kural (1999), for example, for a proposal for 1st and 2nd person as variables bound by operators associated with functional projections. Another question concerns the dif- ference between this highest ranking feature association to Tense and regular agree- ment: for some reason the former is not always reflected overtly in the morphology, unlike regular argument agreement. This may or may not be related to the fact that the morphological elements that are sensitive to hierarchy effects are already struc- turally associated to Tense (clitics and agreement). Note in this light that for the lan- guages discussed in this study, both subject and object features are associated to Tense in this way. It would therefore be instructive to investigate whether there is any asymmetry with respect to hierarchy phenomena between these types of lan- guages and languages which possess only subject agreement or subject clitics. Nev- ertheless, while we may not always see the highest ranking referential features copied as agreement, we do have indirect evidence for their association to Tense in a way that is syntactically (if not morphologically) equivalent to agreement, e.g. the case manipulation facts in Kashmiri and the distribution of PPs in Picurfs. Lastly, a major question yet to resolve concerns the organization of the grammar. It is not clear how referential hierarchies interact with the rest of the derivation of a clause; even under the proposals made here it seems that referential hierarchy phenomena involve computing several parts of the derivation, involving both morphology and syntax, at once. At present this problem can only be addressed in a mechanical fash- ion and is best left pending until a better understanding of such issues is gained. Referential hierarchy phenomena have been considered both exotic and periph- eral; perhaps this is the reason that studies of the phenomena tend toward the lan- guage specific rather than the general. Hierarchy phenomena are not really all that exotic, however; many languages and language types show their effects in one way or another. In addition, the current study has tried to emphasize that a study of these phenomena ultimately informs our understanding of agreement, Case and other phe- nomena bearing on the syntactic properties of functional heads. Thus these phenom- ena certainly should not be considered peripheral since they have an important bear- ing on theories of clause s~ructure in general. -~ For example, we fred in Punjabi that although past subjects ordinarily bear Ergative case marking, 1st and 2nd person past subjects do not and instead are Nommanve. 536 L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 References Allen, Barbara J. and Donald G. Frantz, 1978. Verb agreement m Southern Tiwa. In: Proceedings of the 4th Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, 11-17. Berkeley, CA: University of California. Andrews, Avery, 1990. Case structures and control in Modern Icelandic. In: Joan Maling and Annie Zaenen (eds.), Modern Icelandic syntax (Syntax and Semantics 24), 187-234. San Diego, CA: Aca- demic Press. Avrutin, Sergey, 1994. The structural position of bound variables in Russian. Linguistic Inquiry 24, 709-727. Baker, Mark, 1996. The polysynthesis parameter. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Bhatt, Rakesh M., 1994. Word order and case in Kashmiri. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Illinois. Bhatt, Rakesh M., 1999. Verb movement and the syntax of Kashmiri. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Bhatt, Rakesh M. and James Yoon, 1992. On the composition of Comp and Parameters of V2. In: Dawn Bates (ed.), The proceedings of the tenth West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, 41-52. Stan- ford, CA: CSLI Publications. Bittner, Maria and Kenneth L. Hale, 1996. The structural determination of Case and agreement. Lin- guistic Inquiry 27, 1-68 Cardinaletti, Anna and Michal Starke, 1994. The typology of structural deficiency: On the three gram- matical classes. Manuscript, University of Venice and University of Geneva. Chomsky, Noam, 1993. A minimalist program for linguistic theory. In: Ken Hale and Samuel J. Keyser (eds.), The view from Building 20: Essays in honor of Sylvain Bromberger, 1-52. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, Noam, 1995. Categories and transformations. In: The minimalist program, 219-394. Cam- bridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, Noam, 1998. Minimalist inquiries, the framework. MIT Occasional Papers in Linguistics 15. Cambridge, MA: MIT. Davis, Henry, 1999. Derivation by phase. MIT occasional papers in linguistics, no. 18. Cambridge: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics. Davis, Henry, 1998. Person splits, phi-features and temporal architecture. Paper presented at the GLOW syntax workshop on Agreement systems, Tilburg University, Netherlands. Delancy, Scott, 1981. An interpretation of split ergativity and related pattems. Language 57, 626-657. Dixon, R.M.W., 1994. Ergativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Fabri, Raymond, 1996. The inverse morphology of Plains Cree (Algonquian). In: Geert Booij and Jaap van Marle (eds.), Yearbook of morphology 1995, 17--41. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Gerdts, Donna, 1988. A nominal hierarchy in Halkomelem clausal organization. Anthropological Lin- guistics 30, 20-36. Hale, Kenneth L., 1972. A new perspective on American Indian linguistics, with Appendix by Albert Alvarez. In: Alfonso Ortiz (ed.), New perspectives on the Pueblos, 87-133. Albuquerque, NM: Uni- versity of New Mexico Press. Harrington, John P. and Helen H. Roberts, 1928. Picuris children's stones with texts and songs. 43rd Annual Report, Bureau of American 1925-1926, Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office. Hook, Peter E. and Omar N. Koul, 1984. Pronominal suffixes and split ergativity in Kashmiri. In: Omar N. Koul and Peter E. Hook (eds.), Aspects of Kashmiri linguistics, 123-135. New Delhi: Bahri. Jelinek, Eloise, 1993. Ergative 'splits' and argument type. In: Jonathan Bobaljik and Colin Phillips (eds.), Papers on case and agreement I (MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 18), 15-42. Cambridge, MA: MIT. Jelinek, Eloise, 1999. Datives and argument hierarchies. Paper presented at the 18th West Coast Confer- ence on Formal Linguistics, University of Arizona, Tucson. Laka, Itziar, 1990. Negation in syntax. On the nature of functional categories and projections. Ph.D. dis- sertation, MIT. Lakamper, Renate and Dieter Wunderlich, 1998. Person marking in Quechua - A constraint- based min- imalist analysis. Lingua 105, 113-148. Macaulay, Monica, 1992. Inverse marking in Karuk: The function of the suffix -ap. International Jour- nal of American Linguistics 58, 182-201. L. Nichols / Lingua 111 (2001) 515-537 537 Nash, Leah, 1995. Port6e argumentale et marquage casuel dans les langues SOV et dans les langues ergatives: L'example du g6orgien. Ph.D. dissertation, Universit6 de Paris 8. Nichols, Lynn, in preparation. Syntax at a distance: A study of cross-clausal phenomena. Manuscript, Harvard University. Pollock, Jean-Yves, 1989. Verb movement, universal grammar and the structure of IP. Linguistic Inquiry 20, 365-424. Rouveret, Main, 1988. Temps et cliticisation en portugais. Manuscript, Universit6 de Paris 8. Sapir, Edward, 1930. Southern Paiute, a Shoshonean language. Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 65(1). Silverstein, Michael, 1976. Hierarchy of features and ergativity. In R.M.W. Dixon (ed.), Grammatical categories m Australian languages, 112-171. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies. Silverstein, Michael, 1981. Case marking and the nature of language. Australian Journal of Linguistics 1,227-247. Stowell, TLrn, 1982. The tense of infinitives. Linguistic Inquiry 13, 561-570. Tsoulas, George and Mural Kural, 1999. Indexical pronouns as bound variables. Paper presented at the 18th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, University of Arizona, Tucson. Wali, Kashi and Ashok Kumar Koul, 1994. Kashmiri clitics: The role of case and CASE. Linguistics 32, 969-994. Wali, Kashi and Omar N. Koul, 1997. Kashmiri. Routledge: London and New York. Zwicky, Arnold, 1977. Hierarchies of person. In: Proceedings of the 13th annual meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society, 714-733. Chicago, IL: CLS. 