ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2000) 379-381 Lingua www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Book review Mauricio J. Mixco, Kiliwa de1 Arroyo Le6n, Baja California. Archive de lenguas indigenas de MCxico 18 (coordinator: Yolanda Lastra). MCxico, DF: El Cole- gio de Mexico, 1996. 181 pp. ISBN 968-12-0619-3. Kiliwa is an indigenous language spoken in the municipio (district) of Ensenada in the Mexican state of Baja California. Like the other surviving indigenous lan- guages of Baja California (Cochimi, CucapB, Kumiai and Paipai), Kiliwa is located in the north of the peninsula and belongs to the Yuman family, which has further representatives in the US states of Arizona and California. The languages of the other indigenous groups that once populated the Baja California peninsula, Peric6 and the languages of the Guaicurian family, probably became extinct in the 18th cen- tury. The census of 1990 reports the existence of 41 speakers of Kiliwa (Manrique, 1997), which makes it the smallest Yuman language in Mexico. The book under review is part of the Archive de Lenguas Indigenas de Mhico, a series which is presently coordinated by Yolanda Lastra. Like the other volumes in this series, Kiliwa de1 Arroyo Ledn is presented in a format which allows for an accurate but limited picture of the language. The main virtue of the Archive de Lenguas Indigenas de Mhico series is the mutual comparability of its volumes. Therefore, the book is best used as a supplement to less restricted works of reference dealing with the Kiliwa language. Kiliwa de1 Arruyo Lebn contains an excellent prologue by the Mexican authority in Mesoamerican studies, Miguel Le6n-Portilla, who provides the reader with a detailed overview of the history of the languages of Baja California and their possi- ble affiliations. Le6n-Portilla also mentions Mixco™s extensive and long-standing work on Kiliwa, which includes, among other things, a grammar, a lexicon and sev- eral text collections. The prologue is followed by an introduction, written by the late Jorge A. SuBrez, which contains a statement of the main objectives of the Archive de Lenguas Zndi- genas de Mbxico. The publications in this series should contain a representative sam- ple of the linguistic diversity found in Mexico, and they should be usable for typo- logical and historical comparison. To this end, the material presented is to be divided into four sections: phonology, morphophonematics, grammar, and lexicon. The lex- icon is based on a fixed list of 532 items, which was developed by Roberto J. Weit- laner for the Mesoamerican cultural area. 0024-3841/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(99)00047-9 380 Book review 1 Lingua 110 (2000) 379-381 The phonology section of Kiliwa de1 Arroyo Lebn shows that Kiliwa is a language of great phonological complexity. There is a considerable distance between the phonological representation reflected in the orthography and the phonetic facts which are presented in the section on allophony. However, a hierarchy of phonolog- ical rules is suggested that requires a more detailed treatment than the one provided, if it is to be fully understood. An illustrative case is the word for ‚women™, kﬂ-ku-tu (1) which is realized phonetically as [kbkitu]. First, the labiovelar consonant kﬂ loses its labial element under the influence of the non-contiguous rounded (‚labial™) back vowel. Subsequently, the vowel u, which produces this effect, is itself fronted to [i] because it is part of a stressed non-final syllable. Kiliwa is reported to distinguish three accentual patterns that are linked to the stressed syllable (most often penultimate). The symbol (1) refers to an accentual pat- tern which assigns high tone to a stressed syllable. These distinctive accentual pat- terns are explained in the phonology but are not indicated elsewhere in the material. Epenthetic vowels are frequent in Kiliwa. For instance, ‚I-p_Eiw (1) ‚I smoke™ (p. 37) is realized as [~CBecuw]. The first (phonetic) vowel [e] in kﬂ-ku-tu (1) (see above) is another case in point. The quality of these epenthetic vowels is subject to considerable variation, which is only hinted at in the book. The phonological section is followed by a corpus of text, consisting of a mono- logue and a dialogue. Each sentence is accompanied by a morpheme-for-morpheme translation as well as a free translation. The morpheme-for-morpheme translation is open to some criticism. Stops and commas, which, of course, are additions of the transcriber rather than elements of the text itself, are fully and superfluously glossed as punto (‚stop™) and coma (‚comma™) in the morpheme-for-morpheme translation. On the other hand, crucial morphemes are glossed in an underspecified way. For instance, a set of formatives that occur as prefixed elements in nouns are glossed col- lectively as dn (‚substantival prefix™) without any reference to a specific function or semantic contribution. The complex and highly analytic structure of Kiliwa makes it difficult, if not impossible, for a reader who does not know the language to follow the link between the morpheme-for-morpheme translation and the free translation without additional explanations. For instance, the Kiliwa word for ‚Mexican™ (p. 42) or mestizo (p. 113) appears to be miy=kﬂ-xlal-y, which is glossed as pie=wh-liso- atr (‚foot=relativizing agentive prefix-smooth-attributive/adjectival™). Presumably, the literal meaning of this expression would be something like ‚someone whose feet are smooth™. But, the exact function of all the elements involved is not given in the book, nor is the cultural context that could provide a reason for the fact that Mexi- cans are referred to in this particular way. One may add the observation that the Spanish language is referred to as miy=kﬂ-xlal-y=hai™ or ‚voice of someone whose feet are smooth™ (p, 112). The section entitled ‚motphophonematics™ is only four pages long but contains some highly interesting information on the language. Verbs can have different lexi- cal forms (‚suppletives™) according to the number of the object if the verb is transi- tive, or according to the number of the theme if it is intransitive. This situation is described, rather inaccurately, in the following words (my translation): ﬁThere are verbs whose phonological expression is determined by the grammatical number of Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 379-381 381 the semantic patient. The best examples of these ergative verbs are: sit ‚to go out™, t-i-pat ‚to go out (of a group)‚; h-iiuu ‚to kill one™, which has to be compared with t2aw ‚to kill severalﬁ‚ (p. 61). Obviously, the choice between the verbs sit and t-i- pat depends on the grammatical number of their subject or theme, not of a semantic patient. Furthermore, there is no valid reason to speak of ‚ergative verbs™ in this con- text, even though an element of ergativity is involved. The formation of plurals of all sorts (verbal object and verbal subject) plays an important role in Kiliwa. In addition to root suppletion, affixes are used, as in pa-ii- saw-u (p. 64) ‚you (plural) see us™, ‚ we see you (plural)‚. In this verb form pa- indi- cates ‚plural object™ and -u ‚plural subject™, even though the participant roles are not fully specified. The section on syntax consists of a list of nearly 600 short sentences whose pre- sentation exhibits the same limitations as the earlier text corpus. Since the Spanish text is given first, they are probably pre-selected and elicited sentences that are meant to exemplify particular constructions, as is anticipated in the guiu de1 cues- tionario (‚questionnaire guide™) included in Suarez™s introduction (pp. 24-25). Finally, there is the lexicon. Its usefulness is again severely limited by the fact that it is based on a pre-selected list of Spanish terms. Many of these terms are ren- dered in Kiliwa by morphologically complex, highly descriptive expressions, some of which are periphrases rather than just translations. In order to better understand the Kiliwa language and its structure, a root inventory that brings together the basic elements and concepts of the language is more appropriate (e.g., Mixco, 1985). As in many other Amerindian languages, the number of roots and morphemes in Kiliwa appears to be relatively limited, although they are subject to a sheer infinity of com- binations. Apart from giving a better insight into the structure and the concepts that characterize the Kiliwa language, such an inventory can be helpful for purposes of genetic comparison. References Manrique Castaiieda, Leonardo, 1997. Clasificaciones de las lenguas indigenas de Mexico y sus resulta- dos en el censo de 1990. In: Beatriz Garza Cuar6n (ed.), Politicas linguisticas en Mexico, 39-65. Mexico, DF: La Jomada Ediciones. Mixco, Mauricio J., 1971. Kiliwa grammar. Ph.D. dissertation. University of California, Berkeley. Mixco, Mauricio J., 1983. Kiliwa texts: ‚When I have donned my crest of stars™. Anthropological Papers 107, University of Utah. Salt Lake City. Mixco, Mauricio, J., 1985. Kiliwa Dictionary. Anthropological Papers 109, University of Utah, Salt Lake City. 