ELSEVIER Lingua 110 (2004l) 383-390 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Book review* Anna Szabolcsi (ed.), Ways of Scope Taking. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1997, ISBN O- 7923-4446-4 (Hardback), O-7923-445 1-O (paperback), xxi + 466 pages. Reviewed by Ahti Pietarinen, School of Cognitive and Computing Sciences, Uni- versity of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton BNl 9QH, UK. E-mail: ahtivp@cogs.susx.ac.uk In Ways of Scope Taking, Anna Szabolcsi and nine other contributors present a detailed analysis of a wide range of quantificational scope phenomena from the viewpoint of properties and behaviour of noun phrases. They revise previous treat- ments in that noun phrases are seen not to behave uniformly with respect to scope, and argue that different noun phrases admit of different preferred readings of sen- tences. The issues extensively covered in this book include variation, distributivity, quantifiers every and each, negation, collective readings, branching, w/r/quantifier interaction, anaphora, event quantification, pair-list reading, questions, weak islands, and modal and intensional operators. There are syntactic, semantic and computa- tional accents, but the emphasis is on semantics and syntax/semantics interface. A number of examples come from Hungarian. Particular frameworks employed are minimalist syntax (for distributivity, each and every, negation), discourse represen- tation theory (for discourse scope), algebraic semantics (for weak islands), and gen- eralised quantifiers (for interrogatives, pair-list readings). Not all the arguments are theory-bound, and many of them can be developed in alternative frameworks. This is one of the many virtues of the book, together with the coherence of arguments across the essays, as well as a glabrous presentation of the scope phenomena. The most important contribution of this book is, I think, that it investigates the nature of noun phrases in detail in almost all the aspects currently taken to be rele- vant in understanding the notion of scope, thus displaying a hitherto unseen array of examples on this domain. The data supports, according to authors, the theses that ﬁthe grammar of quantification involves a variety of distinct, often semantically con- ditioned, processesﬂ (p. xiii), and that ﬁthe range of quantifiers that participate in a given process is suggestive of exactly what that process consists inﬂ (p. xiii). I think that such an approach ipso facto can have a slight limitation, too, for not everyone * I am grateful to Anna Szabolcsi for valuable comments. 037%2166/W/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(99)0051-O 384 Book review ! Lingua 110 (2000) 383-390 agrees that noun phrase and its properties is all there is to scope, and the scope behaviour of many other linguistic elements might be relevant as well. The book has eleven chapters, including a useful chapter on background material about lattices, partial orders and generalised quantifiers, plus an extensive introduc- tion. Dividing the book into two parts, the issue in the first six chapters is in explain- ing how various noun phrases acquire their scope and how they interact with each other. For many types of noun phrases, their behaviour is seen to differ in the readi- ness of quantifiers to take inverse scope, for instance. These essays thus pertain to the syntax/semantics interface. The rest five papers argue that also purely semantic scope assignment may derive incoherent meanings. Let me begin describing and commenting the specific content of the book in the third chapter Distributivity and negation: The syntax of each and every by Filippo Beghelli and Tim Stowell, and discuss the second one Variation, distributivity, and the illusion of branching toward the end of this review. In this third chapter, the authors divide noun phrases into two wide categories: the first group has those whose target landing sites (positions for scoping operators in the functional structure of the clause) differ from their case positions, and the second class scope in situ. Scope thus becomes a by-product of noun phrases moving into special syntactic positions. Beghelli and Stowell further argue that distributivity of definites and bare indefinites require a separate tacit each operator, which also interacts with negation in an interesting manner. For example, the sentence ‚John didn™t read each book™ is puzzling whereas ‚John didn™t read every book™ is not, although each in ‚One man didn™t read each book™ appears acceptable. One explanation the authors give is that distributivity is obligatory for each and optional for every, which is brought out by using a specific syntactic distributive operator. The general aim and the motivation for this work is in finding ways of creating new types of logical forms. The next paper Strategies for scope taking by Szabolcsi has a kind of strong cen- tripetal force in it as regards to other chapters, for many arguments in other papers are masterly summarised and put into perspective here. It is argued that novel types of logical forms go beyond the traditional ways of determining scope, such as quan- tifier raising, Cooper storage, type change, quantifying-in, or discourse representa- tion structure constructions, for these traditional mechanisms do not take into con- sideration what those expressions to which a domain is assigned really mean. Szabolcsi argues that each application of quantification generates a semantic process, and that each expression chooses those processes for its evaluation, which accomodate its semantic properties. The emphasis is in the cases where the scope assignments do not necessarily generate incoherent interpretations, but the ones not available for the given forms of the sentences. In Computing quantifier scope by Edward P. Stabler, an interesting proposal for noun phrase scope determination is suggested, which takes that since inferential properties of noun phrases manifest the same properties as semantic ones, the order of explanation can be reversed in a way that the speaker first uses the expression in the syntax and in inference according to its features, and the semantic properties come into picture only secondly. Curiously, the mode of explanation is implemented in a computationally feasible modification of minimalistic syntax, yet there seems to Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 383-390 385 be certain conceptual appeal to this theory. It differs form the ‚pure thought™ idea of taking human thought to be somehow prior to language by assuming that reasoning has to take place within the structures of one™s native language, not outside it. This indeed is plausible, for claiming otherwise would require an explanation of what kind of cognitive structures then are involved in reasoning, and these explanations often unsatisfactory. But some of the claimed consequences, especially the promi- nent role of inference in establishing ﬁfundamental aspects of [the representational features that determine the quantifier scope™s] meaning such as decreasingnessﬂ (p. 156) might raise some opposition, at least if one takes the guiding idea in the previous essay (that the adequate theory of scope should not be semantically blind) literally. Yet the proposal finds its way in between the two rival views, for it does not, at least directly, agree with ‚semantics-follows-syntax™ principle, for some syntactic requirements of a lexical item used in the derivation may be deleted from the derived structure which is subsumed under semantic processing. On the other hand, the infer- ential role of scope determination does not seem to provide sufficient means of get- ting to semantic generalisations modulo scoping options. But remembering the desideratum that this theory accounts for the computational model of the language user, these qualms are allayed. Indeed, the statement ﬁthe speaker uses the deter- miner in a certain way, in the syntax . . . and in inference. Constraints on its semantic value then followﬂ (p. 175) is unlikely to hold for human speakers in full. Therefore, a special interest in the implications of the theory could be in comparing this com- putational model of scope determination with other suggestions made elsewhere in the book, and on the basis of the outcome of this comparison, rather than using the ‚prominent role of inference™, in illustrating the various ways in which we determine scopes. Next, Evaluation indices and scope by Donka F. Farkas departs from the other essays in that scope is not assumed to be a structural notion, but rather a matter of dependencies between Kaplan-style indices of evaluation. Roughly, Farkas distin- guishes the scope of a descriptive content of noun phrases and the scope of sub- scripted variables, where the evaluation of an expression is relative to an index including a world, time, location, and coordinates for speaker and addressee. Since no agreed version of scope exists, one could perhaps ask what the structural notion is that is being eliminated, and why the indices of evaluation are not struc- tural. Lacking any precise or unanimous definition, one thinks of such phrases as ‚wide scope™, ‚c-command™, ‚being higher than™, ‚being dependent on™, ‚imposing a dependency upon™, ‚governing™, ‚raising™, ‚movement™, et cetera. Although scope itself would remain a purely semantic notion, it follows the structural form in that the relative positions of expressions as scoping one another must be read off of some version of structural positions. The assumption in Farkas™ non-structural approach seems to be that the existence of this kind of structure is a contingent matter, as for instance discourse effects override those scopes that cannot move beyond sentence level. The index evaluation method has interesting connections with dynamic semantics, modal quantification, situation theory, and perhaps with discourse representation 386 Book review I Lingua I1 0 (2000) 383-390 theory, some of which are addressed in the paper. It seems that it would be possible to investigate these relations and unify the theories even further, but on the other hand, some ingredients seem to be missing. For the otherwise advanced way of eval- uating indices does not seem to cope with, because of its reliance on ‚rigid reference™ in the wide scope reading of indefinites, the scopes of descriptive contents acquired by visual or perceptual information, for instance. To see this, think of the speaker™s assertion ‚Two boys of mine, John and Jack, are playing in the lawn™ in a situation where the speaker fails to recognise which of the two boys actually is John and which Jack. Now, the proper names (principle filters, if you like), immune to varia- tion, must assign the same value to the variables at all parameters of evaluation. This is implausible, however, for a visual identification (or some other mode of identifi- cation) does not work in a way rigid reference suggests: the index would require at least one additional parameter to indicate the criterion of how the identification is to be established in the first place. In Weak islands and an algebraic semantics for scope taking Szabolcsi and Frans Zwarts assume that weak islands are a scope phenomenon, in that scope effects arise when a w/z-phrase should take wide scope over some operator but is unable to. For example, in ‚Which man didn™t you invite? ™ w/r-phrase extracts the operator, but how in ‚*How didn™t you behave?™ does not. By investigating weak islands and their violations, Szabolcsi and Zwarts address the question of why certain wh-phrases are restricted in their scope-taking abilities, that is, which interveners do not give rise to such weak island violations which would leave readings of the sentences lacking a coherent interpretation? A semantic answer given here is that a wh-phrase can take wide scope over some other element (intervener) within its own scope only if the operations on this other element are defined in the denotation domain of the phrase. For example, in ‚Which man didn™t you invite?™ complements are defined for the domain for which which man ranges over, but not so for the domain of how in ‚*How didn™t you behave?‚, for qualitative behaviour expressed by the manner verb behave does not form Boolean algebras. This answer in continued in Szabolcsi™s Quantifiers in pair-list reading in one particular dimension. By investigating pair-list readings in quantificationally inter- preted interrogatives in questions such as ‚Who did every dog bite?™ (fixed domain reading) and ‚Who did six dogs bite ? ™ (choice reading), Szabolcsi challenges the earlier (implicit) assumptions made by Groenendijk and Stokhof, Higginbotham, and Chierchia about the properties of quantifiers in those readings, in that the matrix (intensional) and extensional complement question contexts are seen to support dif- ferent quantifiers. Specifically, Szabolcsi argues that pair-list readings as generalised quantifiers over individual questions are not necessary in matrix interrogatives, and that almost all quantifiers support pair-list readings in extensional complements. The quantifiers in questions are claimed to be domain restrictors in complements of extensional verbs, however, but not in matrix questions and complements of inten- sional verbs in general. In the related essay The syntax of distributivity and pair-list readings Beghelli zooms in on some of the issues raised in the previous paper. In particular, distribu- tivity is seen to play an important role in pair-list reading of interrogatives. Beghelli Book review / Lingua I10 (2000) 383-390 387 argues that there is a number of asymmetries in how pair-list readings are distributed across various quantifications, such as matrix and embedded questions, distributive- universal quantifier phrases every and each and other types of quantifier phrases, and even between every and each themselves. Presumably, the paper covers and analy- ses more cases than any previous syntactic theory on pair-list readings. The only essay to develop scope phenomena exclusively in generalised quantifier theory is Javier Gutierrez Rexach™s Questions and generalized quantifiers. In partic- ular, wh-expressions and interrogatives are attempted to be brought under the theory of generalised quantifiers. Gutierrez Rexach interprets questions as functions assign- ing truth-values to answers (sets of objects), and shows how some properties of determiners can be applied to wh-phrases, which in this theory behave much in the same way as determiners. Now for two slightly more specific comments. In the second chapter Variation, distribution, and the illusion of branching by Beghelli, Dorit Ben-Shalom and Szabolcsi, the scope is divided into variation, distributivity, and (in downwards entailing environments) maximality. A variation inducing scope is a property of a noun phrase which can assign different readings to the sentence by varying with another noun phrase, e.g. in SVO sentence ‚Three men read two books™ two books varies with men, and three men is a ‚non-singleton minimal witness™ - a necessary condition for variation. Distributivity says that this sentence can have a reading where there are at most six books, and each of the men individually read two (pos- sibly different) books. Maximality imposes a condition witness method cannot cope with, namely a non-embedding to larger models, for sentences involving non-monot- onic quantifiers (e.g. ‚Exactly three men . . . ‚) may become false in larger models. All this is hardly news, but the argument is that these three constituents of scope explain away the phenomenon of branching. The branching reading says, roughly, that the subject noun phrase, as a group, has everything there is to the object noun phrase. Syntactically, neither of the noun phrases takes wide scope over the other. Some examples (I should note that the authors do not refer to the first two, somewhat classical examples): Jackendoff (1972: 305): ﬁthe same group of [three] men [read] all two booksﬂ; Hintikka (1979: 142) ﬁthere is a . . . set of [men] who have jointly [read two books]ﬁ; Gil (1982: 463): ﬁin natural language, scope dependency is a marked or unusual state of affairs - the preferred interpretations of sentences being the symmetric ones, in which neither of two quantifiers has wider scope than the otherﬂ. Gil had an extra argument that even the branching is not sufficient for ‚strong symmetric interpretations™, where two men read a book and one man read a (different) book. This situation is quite generally accepted as subsumable under cumulative reading (see below). Nevertheless, Beghelli, Ben-Shalom and Szabolcsi argue that the branching is superfluous and does not provide a separate reading, since it induces a reading which one can derive by other (preferred) methods any- way. (Authors further claim that these readings are ‚logically equivalent™ (p. 40, 62, 65); presumably it is meant weak logical equivalence, i.e. the sentences are true in the same models, but not necessarily false, which would yield strong equivalence. This distinction is important, since even a non-scope differentiated structure (inessential branching) of one universal quantifier and one existential quantifier does 388 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 383-390 not reduce to a wide scope existential sentence in the sense of being strongly equiv- alent to it.) The other methods the authors prefer are ‚scopally asymmetric™ (S > 0 or 0 > S) and cumulative readings. Cumulative reading says that ‚Altogether three men read two books, and altogether two books were read by them™. Indeed, cumulation comes close to branching reading, but the connection between the two sets is weaker, since it suffices to have both books to be read by some of the men, and all three men read- ing some of the books. According to the authors, all branching readings, including resumptives, can be subsumed under cumulative readings, given their discussion of branching schema in terms of generalised quantifier theory. However, the argument for the illusion of branching is not completely conclusive. Authors note this, by having two caveats; cumulative and branching readings coin- cide in the case of the empty set reading of the resumptive ‚No one loves no one™. Also, a possibility remains that the sentence ‚Exactly two dogs bit no more and no fewer than three men™ might, given the suggestion (originating from van Benthem) of branching as 3X3Y [D(X) A M(Y) A R(X,Y) = X x yl enjoys independent branch- ing reading. Further, one should be reminded of a certain limitation of the application of the argument for the illusion, since only a limited domain SVO sentences are being con- sidered. In fact, a fair amount of data from other domains can be adduced to support independent branching readings. Interesting candidates are certain indicative sen- tences involving choice functions, such as ‚When a girl he likes, or a boy she admires comes over, every man shows her his house, and every woman shows him her album™. This sentence may involve choice with reduced or imperfect infotma- tion, and thus be branching, cf. the (simplified) symbolisation as 3 fig vx by[((lf(x)x A C™x)) V (Ag(z)z A Cg(z))) * (Hfx)x A Bg(z)z)], because the choices for the phrases a boy she admires and a girl he likes depend only on every woman and every man, respectively. Other examples involving choice functions giving rise to essential irreducible branching can be generated along these lines, and thus appear to be dissonant with the book™s conjecture about wider domain applications: ﬁ... consonant suggestions have been made about other sentence types. [May, Krifka, Schein, and van der Does and Verkuyl] . . . suggest either that alleged branching cases are due to contextual factors or that branching is to be derived compositionally, . . . and an independent branching schema is never necessary. [...I So let us assume . . . that an independent branching schema is indeed not attested in natural languageﬂ (P. 65). The second comment concerns the essay The semantics of event-related readings: A case for pair-quantification by Jenny Doetjes and Martin Honcoop. They discuss the object vs. event-related reading of the sentences such as ‚Last year, 4,000 ships passed through the lock™. The object-related reading says that ‚4,000 ships are such that each of them passed through the lock last year™, contrasting with the event- related ‚there were 4,000 events last year in which a ship passed through the lock™ (or ‚The lock was passed through 4,000 times last year by a ship™). The authors focus on the event-related reading, because it allows what they call ‚the recycling of indi- viduals™ (p. 264). That is, the sentence comes out as true even if, say, only one ship Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 383-390 389 passed through the lock, but 4,000 times. Doetjes and Honcoop™s suggestion is to give semantics for the event-related reading as a quantification over pairs (event, object); in this case as (passed-through-the-lock, ship), which would account for the recycling by, say, increasing the counter (event: passed-through-the-lock) but not (object: ship) whenever the same ship passes through the lock more than once. One interesting consequence concerns the sensitivity of event-related readings to the properties of determiners. The authors argue that weak, symmetric determiners such as ar least allow for both object and event-related readings, but that sentences with strong, non-symmetric determiners lack event-related readings. The event-related reading says that the number of individuals in a model is invari- ant. However, this is the standard assumption behind normal logics, and ordinary first-order logic in particular. For each individual drawn from the model, the stan- dard interpretation of first-order logic assumes that any individual that is picked from the domain of the structure is placed back to the model. In this sense, ordinary logic really is a logic with recycling. There thus does not seem to be any representa- tion problem for the recycled reading, for one can assimilate objects and events and give classical truth-conditional semantics, say, in a temporal model. A more inter- esting case, therefore, would actually be the object-related reading, not addressed in this paper, for there the models are changing as they are investigated. One could think of draws from the model without the replacement, where each successive draw changes the domain and hence the model. The previous argument concerns the general discussion about event vs. object- related reading rather than any particular aspects of Doetjes and Honcoop™s essay. I would like to mention, however, that Doetjes and Honcoop note that ﬁthe necessary condition for the felicity of [event-related reading] is that the identity of the individ- uals [is] both irrelevant and easy to ignoreﬂ (p. 266). But if this is so and the iden- tity of individuals does not count, the proposed semantics might not be viable for the recycled reading of sentences with intensional verbs, such as ‚John knows which ships passed through the lock last year™. However, intensional semantics for wh- locutions can presumably deal with this kind of readings in a fairly classical way. Further, quantifying over the pair (event, object) increases only the number of events whenever the same object is responsible for the event twice, but how would ‚the same™ be interpreted here if the objects have been left unidentified? In conclusion, the book appears to suggest that the notion of scope is little more than a term of art. An impressive range of data has been collected in this volume to concord with such a conclusion, and it certainly is a remarkable achievement that authors have put forward not only individually significant analyses of scope phe- nomena, but simultaneously maintained the cohesion between (sometimes theory- dependent but not necessarily theory-bound) arguments by agreeing on many of the foundational questions. References Gil, D., 1982. Quantifier scope, linguistic variation, and natural language semantics. Linguistics and Phi- losophy 5, 421-472. 390 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 383-390 Hintikka, J., 1979. Rejoinder to Peacocke. In: Saarinen, E. et al. (eds.), Essays in honour of Jaakko Hin- tikka: On the occasion of his fiftieth birthday, 135-151. Dordrecht: Reidel. Jackendoff, R.S., 1972. Semantic interpretation in generative grammar. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 