ELSEVIER Lingua 10 (2000) 315-341 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Setting parametric limits on dialectal variation in Spanish* Almeida Jacqueline Toribio Department of Spanish, Italian and Portuguese, Pennsylvania State University, Universiry Park, PA 16802-6203, USA Received 31 August 1998; revised 15 August 1999 Abstract The present investigation departs from the perspective that dialects of languages may exemplify typological distinctions, and as such, may be defined within parametric limits. More specifically, this synchronic study focuses on the inter- and intra-dialectal variation attested within the Spanish language, heretofore exempted from the scrutiny that has charac- terized syntactic studies of other Romance languages. The analysis of said variability, which centers on the licensing of null and overt subjects, reveals intralingual differences that serve to bolster syntactic-theoretical argumentation and corroborate the structures and principles of the Minimalist program. 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. 1. Introduction Linguistic theorizing, as carried out within the Principles and Parameters frame- work, has proceeded, to date, largely uninformed by pertinent facts revealed within the sub-discipline of dialectology. While the theory has been significantly articulated by reference to proposals regarding attested morpho-syntactic differences between languages (e.g., Spanish versus English, or Spanish versus French), the study of syn- chronic variation as observed between and within dialects of the same language (e.g., Standard Latin American Spanish versus Dominican Spanish), with notable * This work draws on several primary sources. Preliminary speech samples were collected in the Dominican Republic in 1992 by the author, and additional data was gathered in New York in 1997 by Kimann Johnson. In 1998, the author again traveled to the Dominican Republic and New York to com- plete more extensive interviews in the service of a larger study of Dominican Spanish; data was col- lected from forty-six speakers representative of diverse socio-economic classes and geographical regions. This more recent investigation was generously funded by the Faculty Research Assistance Pro- gram and the Academic Senate of the University of California, Santa Barbara. 0024-3841/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved PII: SOO24-3841(99)00044-3 316 A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 exception, has been relegated to the domain of sociolinguistics. However, it should be clear that an informed assessment of dialectal variation and change can afford unique perspectives into the constraints and limits on possible grammars, and, in turn, make a valuable contribution to our understanding of the nature of the language faculty. Drawing on the insights of Henry (1995, 1997) and Wilson and Henry (1998) on variability in Belfast English, the present work departs from the perspec- tive that dialects of languages may exemplify typological distinctions, and as such, may be defined within the parametric limits afforded by Universal Grammar. Such an orientation to the examination of varieties of Spanish avails a view of the Domini- can Spanish vernacular as a source of facts appropriate to a theory of language, rather than as a peculiar linguistic object that deviates from the pan-American nor- mative standard. Speech samples, collected from speakers representative of diverse backgrounds, amply attest to the intralingual variation that serves to distinguish Dominican Span- ish from other varieties; said variation centers on the availability of null referential and expletive subjects and the positional licensing of subjects in declarative, non- finite, and interrogative clauses. The descriptive generalizations of the differential patterns observed between Dominican Spanish and Standard Latin American Span- ish and within the dialect itself are amenable to analysis within Chomsky™s (1993, 1995) Minimalist Program, where linguistic variation is expressed in terms of the morphological strength of abstract CASE features specified on lexical items and the requisite feature matching that motivates movement of these elements to functional projections. Thus, the distinguishing properties that emerge from inter- and intra- dialectal comparisons will be shown to be characterized by highly constrained dif- ferences relating to the strength of morpho-syntactic specifications that will entail the presence or absence of particular derivations and derived structures. It will be argued specifically that speakers of Dominican Spanish have available an I-language that is variable between parameter settings of nominal TENSE and AGR features; on this view, speakers are bi-lingual in their native language, a state of affairs that typ- ifies linguistic change in progress. The article is organized as follows. Section 2 is devoted to the presentation of speech samples which provide the reader with the requisite overview of the linguis- tic properties at issue. Dominican Spanish will be revealed to demonstrate apparently contradictory patterns with respect to the availability of null subject pronouns and the position of subjects across grammatical structures. Section 3 presents the theo- retical orientation for accommodating the facts of language and dialectal variation within current syntactic-theoretical constructs, and introduces cognate research pro- grams and proposals from diachronic and developmental studies. Section 4 presents the analysis which is the kernel of the work. Section 4.1 exposes the specific frame- work of analysis, the Minimalist Program, delineating those aspects most relevant for the ensuing analysis; section 4.2 introduces the facts of Dominican Spanish into current syntactic theory, confronting and advancing the Minimalist Program with new empirical data. Finally, section 5 concludes the paper, recapitulating the main finding - namely, that speakers of Dominican Spanish have available to them two distinct grammars, as dictated by competing morphological strengths of nominal fea- AJ. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 317 tures on the functional nodes TENSE and AGR - and embedding linguistic variabil- ity within a more general theory of language. 2. Overview of the data The immense diversity of the dialects of Latin American Spanish has stimulated significant popular interest and scholarly attention. l Monographs and book-length accounts have added to our knowledge by synthesizing and comparing the salient features of individual dialects. What invariably emerges from the literature is the uniqueness of the dialects of Spanish spoken in the Caribbean region, with the Dominican Republic at the forefront of linguistic innovation. Henriquez Urefia (1940) and Jimenez Sabater (1975) present the most complete analyses of the dialect, detailing the lexical, phonological, morphological, and syntactic characteris- tics that identify this dialect of Spanish and distinguish it from the Spanish spoken in other Latin American nations and from the established Latin American Spanish norm. As expected, variations in the lexicon abound. The introduction of Tafno/Arawak indigenisms such as uji™, cabuya, and guancibana, and Africanisms such as riame, cachimbo, and fkferes speak to historical contact, and continued inno- vations in the lexicon attest to the vitality of the language, and to Dominicans™ ten- dency to language play in particular. However, these linguistic processes and prac- tices are not always positively appraised (cf. Toribio, forthcoming): (1) Hay un conjunto de frases propias de1 pais, y hay cosas que se ponen de moda . . . Hay pueblos donde la gente tiene mas cuidado en hablar un buen castellano ‚There is a set of phrases that is unique to the nation and there are things that come into style. . . . There are towns where people take more care in speaking a good Spanish . . . ™ Perhaps more salient are the regional variations based in pronunciation, particu- larly of syllable-final consonants. * Especially noteworthy are the processes that affect syllable-final liquids, the most prevalent being lamdacism (/r/-+1]), glide for- mation (/L/+j]), and rotacism (/l/+[r]). For example, as illustrated in (2), the items saltur ‚jump-infin.‚, saltas ‚jump-2sg.pres.‚, and saltuban ‚jump-3pl.imper-f.™ may be rendered with distinct pronunciations in the capital city of Santo Domingo, in the northwestern agricultural countryside of the Cibao Valley, and in the southern region. (2) a. norm: [saltar], [saltas], [salt6l%n] b. Santa Domingo: [s&al], [salta], [saltat3arJ]/[salti?i] c. Cibao Valley: [sajtaj], [sajta], [sajtat3%rJ]/[sajta&I] d. Southern coast: [s&tar], [sarta], [sartaf3ar~]/[sartal.%I] ™ For a recent, comprehensive treatment, the reader is referred to Lipski (1994). 318 A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 More notably, the Dominican Spanish dialect has witnessed a decrease in morpho- logical distinctions which may owe to reduction of other alveolar consonants. A common feature is the weakening of syllable-final /s/, which may be subsequently elided, as illustrated in (2).3 While Henriquez Urefia™s (1940: 139) early survey of the language revealed that ﬁen la diccidn culta se procura evitar la modificationﬂ (‚in educated speech one tends to avoid the modification™), some fifty years later Lipski (1994) estimates the consonantal reduction to be so common as to be nearly categorical, even among educated speakers. Also attested across regional and social dialects are the velarization and elision of syllable-final /n/, though, as indicated in the transcriptions in (2), the nasalization remains on the preceding vowel.4 2.1. The availability of null pronominal subjects The aforementioned consonantal changes may have given rise to incipient phono- logical restructuring: nasalization may be ascribed with phonemic value (e.g., for some speakers [salta] contrasts with [saltH]).5 Moreover, the loss of syllable-final /s/ has had significant consequences in the verbal system, eliminating distinctions across numerous verbal paradigms: as {-s } is the morpheme for second person in the singular paradigm, in most tenses and moods, its reduction has resulted in the con- vergence of second with third persons, and in the imperfect and conditional, first, second, and third persons are rendered homophonous. The latter alteration is espe- cially noteworthy, for in the traditional linguistic literature, the distinctions encoded by richness of inflectional endings have been linked to the availability of null sub- jects.6 Thus, we would predict that the reduction and loss of morphological distinc- tions in verbal endings would effect the rise of overt (and obligatory) pronominal z Garcia et al. (1988) note that Dominicans are very conscious of their radical pronunciation, especially in view of other highly conservative Latin American varieties; but their lexical regionalisms and syntac- tic innovations evade self-censure. 3 The two-step process is as follows: the segment loses its supralatyngeal features and only the aspira- tion remains, and then the consonant slot is lost altogether. 4 More precisely, the /n/ is velarized in syllable rhymes: instituto [ir)s-ti-tu-to] ‚institute™ (cf. Harris, 1983). The nasal segment fails to undergo the customary assimilation of place features; it is rendered as the velar variant, save in the context of labial consonants, to which it assimilates. 5 To be sure, the distinction may go undetected by the untrained listener, as the author™s first attempt at transcription proved. 6 Many researchers have tried to relate the null subject property to rich verbal inflection, pointing out that languages such as Standard Spanish have an agreement system which is quite complex, whereas lan- guages such as English have one which is very poor. Chomsky (1981) suggests that in null subject lan- guages, AGR(eement) in INFL(ection) makes it possible to recover the information made unavailable by the fact that the subject is phonetically missing. Elaborating, Rizzi (1982) proposes that the characteris- tic property of null subject languages is that their verbal inflection is specified with a feature [+pronoun], i.e., it has clitic-like pronominal properties. In this mode of inquiry, Lipski (1977) proposes that the Spanish subject pronoun cliticizes onto the verb, recovering the person and number features that may be lost by the weakening of verbal agreement. Such an account, fails, however, since these subject pronouns do not demonstrate the behavior common to clitics. For example, as noted by Sufier and Lizardi (1995) these pronouns can be separated from the verb by negation. In addition, unlike clitics which are, by def- inition, unstressed, pronouns such as nosotros and usted must be stressed. A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 319 subjects.™ This is only apparently the case in Dominican Spanish, i.e., it is unclear whether we can regard the deterioration and loss of morphological endings as the catalyst or determining factor in the appearance of overt subjects. It is unmistakable, however, that in marked contrast to Standard Latin American Spanish, in which subject pronouns are typically expressed only for emphatic pur- poses, Dominican Spanish allows for subjects to be freely employed, without added pragmatic force, as observed in (3) (note that the pronominal forms under consider- ation appear in italics throughout the ensuing transcripts, though the morpho-phono- logical reductions previously outlined are not represented). (3) Overt subject pronouns with specific and non-specific human reference: a. b. C. d. e. Yo no lo vi, e™l estaba en Massachusetts, acababa de llegar, pero muy probable para el doming0 pasado, que fue Dfa de las Madres alla, e™l estaba en Nueva York . . . El estaba donde Eugenia, y yo creo que Pl se va a quedar alla . . . ‚I didn™t see him, he was in Massachusetts, he had just arrived, but quite probably by last Sunday, which was Mother™s Day there, he was in New York. . . . He was at Eugenia™s, and I think that he is going to stay there . ..™ Simplemente tus padres te dicen, <<Buena m™hijo, todo lo que tli me pidas yo te lo doy, pero tu carrera tli tienes que hacerla tu>>. ‚Your parents simply tell you, ﬁWell son, all that you ask of me I will give it to you, but your career you have to make it for yourselfﬂ.™ En esa area de1 Rodeo no se hablaba bien el espafiol. Ellos usaban a veces unas palabras dialecticas, que a veces uno mismo ni las entendia . . . Yo recuerdo que a veces ellos hablaban delante de uno y uno no entendia las pal- abras. ‚In that area of El Rodeo people didn™t speak Spanish well. They sometimes used dialectal words, that sometimes we ourselves didn™t understand . . I recall that sometimes they spoke in front of us and we didn™t understand the words. ™ Nosotros a veces nos descuidamos, salvo que no sea para un discurso, coma por ejemplo una entrevista . . . En eso nosotros nos descuidamos mucho, 10s dominicanos especfficamente. ‚We sometimes are careless, except in cases of speeches, as for example an interview. In that we are careless, Dominicans specifically.™ Ellos me dijeron que yo tenfa anemia . . . Si ellos me dicen que yo estoy en peligro cuando ellos me entren la aguja por el ombligo, yo me voy a ver en una situation de estres. ‚They told me that I had anemia . . . If they tell me that I am in danger when they put the needle in my belly-button, I am going to find myself in a stress- ful situation.™ ™ In Hebrew, for example, thematic null subjects are possible only in those paradigms in which person agreement is not ‚defective™ (Borer, 1986). Likewise, as reported in McCloskey and Hale (1984), Irish allows thematic null subjects with the rich agreement synthetic forms, but not with the poorly inflected analytic forms. 320 A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (iuO0) 315-341 However, this marked use of subject pronouns has proliferated throughout the pronominal system, so that even verb forms that remain distinct with respect to person and number are nonetheless accompanied by the subject pronoun, e.g., nosotros lleg- amos [nosotroyey&no] ‚we arrive-lpl.pret.‚, tli llegaste [tuyeyate] ‚you arrive- 2sg.pret.‚, ellos llegaron [Cyoyeyir6] ‚they arrive-3pl.pret.‚. That is, any subject pro- noun may be overtly expressed without emphatic force, not merely those which would be most plainly necessitated by phonological reductions. Therefore functional com- pensation hypotheses such as those proposed by Hochberg (1986) and Cameron (1992) cannot account for the appearance of subject pronouns in the Dominican vernacular. Furthermore, the diversity of inflectional systems that license null subjects makes clear the difficulty of arriving at the requisite notion of inflectional richness; witness the availability of null subjects in Chinese, which lacks overt verbal agreement (cf. Huang, 1984), and the unavailability of null subjects in Icelandic, which demon- strates agreement as rich as that in Standard Spanish (cf. Sigur&son, 1989, 1993).* We might instead invoke paradigmatic pressure or parametric shift in accounting for the preponderance of subject pronouns in evidence, a proposal that finds support in the use of the thematic pronoun even for inanimate subjects, as in (4), where in normative speech only a null pronoun is felicitous, and in the over-use of uno ‚one™ with first-person singular reference, and with impersonal reference alongside the neutral pronouns tli and usted ‚you™ (5), where other dialects might employ a null non-specific plural pronoun or an impersonal se construction. (4) Overt subject pronoun with non-human reference: a. [Re: river] El tiene poca agua. (cf., e.g., Tiene poca agua.) ‚It has little water.™ b. [Re: buses] Ellas se saben devolver en Villa; ellas pasan de largo. ‚They often turn around in Villa; they pass you by.™ c. [Re: cistern] A la cistema mfa ya no le falta agua. Ella tiene agua. ‚My cistern doesn™t lack water; it has water.™ (5) Personal and impersonal neutral pronouns tti, uno, and usted. a. Uno habla regularcito aqui. (cf., e.g., Se habla regularcito aqui.) ‚We speak somewhat normally here.™ ™ After reviewing the typology of agreement systems that license null subjects, Jaeggli and Safir (1989) propose that the crucial property in determining the set of null-subject languages is not morphological richness, but morphological uniformity, i.e., null subjects are possible only in those paradigms in which either all forms are morphologically complex, as in Standard Spanish, or none of them are, as in Chinese, but if the paradigm is mixed, as in English, null subjects are precluded. Hermon and Yoon (1989) note that while this uniformity account avoids some of the problems encountered by the agreement-based approaches, it too is empirically inadequate; for example, Swedish is quite uniform, and yet does not allow any type of null subject (cf. Platzack, 1987). While different theories assign a different role to the relation of subject-verb agreement, all agree that it is the special status of the inflectional system of a language that licenses null subjects. For a review of the typology of agreement systems that license null subjects, the reader is referred to Gilligan (1987). A J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 321 b. Uno cuando vino uno no sabia mucho el espafiol, porque uno habla su ingles. Uno miraba a 10s muchachos jugando y uno ahi trancadito. Poco a poco uno se adapt6 . . . A mi me gusta alla, pero entonces, coma uno tiene su negocio aqui . . . uno no va a cager para alla para trabajarle a otro. (cf., e.g., . . . Cuando vine no sabia mucho el espaiiol . . . ) ‚When I came I didn™t know much Spanish, because I spoke English. I looked at the kids playing outside and I was locked up. Little by little I adapted . . . I like it there, but then, since you have your business here . . . you™re not going to go there to work for another.™ c. Uno se da cuenta que uno es adult0 ya: nadie te controla, nadie va a ver tus notas, nadie te dice si tti vas o no vas. Tzi hates lo que tli te propones a hater. ‚You realize that you are an adult: nobody controls you, nobody™s going to see your grades, nobody tells you if you can go or not. You do what you set out to do.™ d. Entre tti mas estudias tti te vas proyectando mejor y estas adquiriendo m&s experiencia. Algo que tli no conoces o no conocfas a traves de 10s estudios tti lo vas a conocer. Si td decias una palabra ma1 anteriormente, . . . tzi ya la hablas correctamente. ‚The more you study the better you project yourself and acquire more expe- rience. Something that you don™t know or didn™t know through studies you begin to know. If you used to say a word badly before, you now speak it cor- rectly. ™ e. Todo es relativo a coma usted vea las cosas . . . Algo que no me gusta es que usted tenga que trabajar para mantener a 10s vagos. ‚It™s all relative to how you see things . . . Something I don™t like is that you have to work to maintain the lazy.™ And perhaps the most intriguing and most telling characteristic of the dialect is the presence of the non-referential pronoun ello, which is completely devoid of the- matic content and force; the overt expression of the expletive, exemplified in (6), is striking, as it has no equivalent expression in other varieties of Spanish. (6) Overt expletive pronoun: a. El10 llegan guaguas hasta alla. (cf. Llegan guaguas hasta alla.) ‚There arrive buses there.™ b. El10 habia mucha gente en lay-a-way. ‚There were a lot of people on stand-by.™ c. Ellos querfan renovar el centro para el turismo y ello hay mucha gente que lo opone. ‚They wanted to renovate the center for tourism and there were many people who opposed it.™ JimCnez Sabater (1975: 164-165) provides an explicit statement of the interrela- tion of all of the aforementioned properties: ﬁEn el habla dominicana actual parece 322 A.J. Toribio I Lingua I10 (2000) 315-341 sentirse cada vez m&s la necesidad de diferenciar la segunda de la tercera persona de1 singular utilizando 10s respectivos pronombres antepuestos al verbo. Estos se men- cionan, cuando menos, una vez en cada oration o pen™odo . . . En la zona de1 Cibao estas expresiones mas o menos redundantes coinciden curiosamente con la uti- lizacidn de1 pronombre fosil ello coma sujeto antepuesto a verbos ‚impersonales™ﬂ (‚In contemporary Dominican speech one finds the need to differentiate between second and third persons more and more by inserting the respective pronouns before the verb. These are used at least once in each sentence or turn . . . In the Cibao region, these more or less redundant expressions coincide, surprisingly, with the use of the fossil pronoun acting as subject before ‚impersonal™ verb forms™). These iden- tifying characteristics are accompanied by concomitant innovations in the placement of subjects, foregrounding the perennial problem of the relation between inflectional morphology, null pronouns, and word order variation. 2.2. The placement of overt subjects Another prominent distinguishing feature of Dominican Spanish is the pattern of word order attested in declaratives, interrogatives, and infinitival constructions. The word order of declaratives in Standard Latin American Spanish is relatively free, demonstrating a sensitivity to pragmatic considerations such as theme-rheme requirements (e.g., Llegb Juan vs. Juan flegb ‚Juan arrived™), and syntactic consid- erations such as verb class (e.g., Juan Beg6 ‚Juan arrived™ vs. Juan cant6 ‚Juan sang™). In contrast, word order in Dominican Spanish is relatively fixed - subject- verb-object - irrespective of sentence type or verb class, a fact frequently noted in the literature. Further corroboration for the fixing of pre-verbal positional licensing for subjects is the fact that the pattern is maintained even in questions, where the Standard Latin American Spanish norm requires that the verb appear in second posi- tion, pre-posed to the subject (cf. Toribio, 1990, 1993b; Sufier, 1994). As shown in (7), in Dominican Spanish the pre-verbal position is available to pronouns and full NPs alike (again, the subject phrases under consideration appear in italics in the ensuing examples). This lack of inversion in questions is noted in Henrfquez Urefia (1940) and by JimCnez Sabater (1975: 169), the latter stating that the pre-verbal positioning of subject pronouns in questions ﬁes practicamente general en el espaiiol de la Repdblica Dominicanaﬂ (‚is practically generalized in the Spanish of the Dominican Republic™). (7) Interrogatives : a. Papi, LquC ese letrero dice? (cf. Papi, LquC dice ese letrero?) ‚Daddy, what does that sign say? ™ b. iQuC yo les voy a mandar a esos muchachos? ‚What am I going to send to those boys? ™ c. iQuC ndmero tzi anotaste? , . . Ahorita tti vas a ver si sale. ‚What number did you write down? . . . In a while you will see if it comes out (a winner). ™ A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 323 d. ~Cu6nto un mkdico gana? ‚How much does a doctor earn? ™ e. Y con quien Fredi esta alla? ‚And with whom is Fredy there? ™ Dominican Spanish also employs an additional strategy as a means of circum- venting the inverted order, namely, the pseudo-cleft illustrated in (8), which, in turn, could explain the focus strategy, in (9), whose null operator is very pronounced in the Dominican vernacular (cf. Toribio, 1992, 1993b). (8) Pseudo-cleft: a. LDonde fue que tli estudiaste? (cf. LDonde estudiaste (tti)?) ‚Where did you study?/Where was it that you studied? ™ b. LEn que es que tli te vas a graduar? ‚What will you graduate in?/In what is it that you will graduate?™ c. ~Qut es lo que ese muchacho me trae? ‚What is that boy bringing me?/What is it that that boy is bringing me?™ d. iCu6nto fue que e™l me dijo que costaba? ‚How much did he tell me it costs?/How much was it that he told me it costs?™ e. iCu6ndo es que ustedes se van? ‚When is it that you are leaving?/When are you leaving?™ (9) Focus strategy: a. Yo quiero es comida. (cf. Comida quieroyo/Lo que (yo) quiero es comida.) ‚I want food/What I want is food.™ b. Alla en 10s Estados Unidos yo hice fue el kinder. ‚There in the United States I went to kindergarten./ It was kindergarten I went to.™ c. Ese nifio esta es enfermo. ‚That child is sick/What that child is is sick.™ d. Tc2 trajiste fue una sola maleta nada m&s. ‚You brought only one suitcase/What you brought was only one suitcase.™ e. Mamci tiene que ir es al mercado. ‚Mom has to go to the market/It™s to the market that mom has to go.™ Finally, and more interestingly, Dominican Spanish permits overt pre-verbal sub- jects in non-finite (infinitival and gerundive) clauses, as in (lo), the attested subject- infinitive order standing in marked contraposition to that observed in Standard Latin American Spanish, in which the subject would appear post-posted to the infinitival verb (cf. Toribio, 1993a). (10) Non-finite clause with overt nominative subject: a. Ven aca, para nosotros verte. (cf. Ven aca, para verte (nosotros).) ‚Come here, for us to see you.™ 324 A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 b. A la came se le mezcla limon para usted lavarla. ‚To the meat, you add lemon for you to wash it.™ c. Me gusta la forma de ellos hablar. ‚I like their way of speaking.™ d. YES que no te dicen sin tzi preguntar? ‚It™s that they don™t tell you without you asking.™ e. Tienes que ir a cambiarle un dinero a estas mujeres antes de ellas irse para alla. ‚You have to go exchange some money for these women before they leave.™ f. Yo lo dudo que Carmen venga . . . Ella vive enferma, sin 10s mkdicos encon- trarle nada. ‚I doubt that Carmen will come . . . She is always sick, without the doctors finding anything wrong with her.™ g. En tzi estando con ella, nada te pasa. ‚In you being with her, nothing will happen to you.™ While Henrfquez Urefia (1940) reports the pre-verbal positioning of subjects in infinitival clauses as possible for the expression of pronouns, it is described by JimCnez Sabater (1975 : 169) as having displaced the canonical post-verbal position- ing only three decades later, ﬁpropagado ya a aquellos cases en que el infinitivo viene acompafiado de un sustantivo y no de un simple pronombre coma sujetoﬂ (‚extended to those cases where the infinitive is joined to a noun and not simply to a pronoun acting as subject™). We therefore concur with the latter™s conclusion: ﬁPodrfamos pensar que se esta extendiendo un esquema ‚sujeto-verbo™ en el cual un orden riguroso de las palabras (sujeto precediendo al verbo) serfa rasgo relevanteﬂ (‚we might believe in the diffusion of a subject-verb pattern in which a strict word ordering (subject preceding the verb) is a pertinent feature™). 2.3. Summary of the data The previously presented speech samples, collected from speakers representative of diverse socio-economic classes and ages, amply attest to the phonological and morpho-syntactic properties which serve to distinguish Dominican Spanish from other varieties. As noted, said variation centers on the reduction of syllable-final alveolar consonants and the availability of null referential and expletive subjects and the positional licensing of subjects in declarative, non-finite, and interrogative clauses. It merits stressing that null subject pronouns and post-verbal positioning of subjects are indeed available to the speakers sampled. A review of the foregoing transcriptions, however brief, reveals that within one speaker™s speech there are seg- ments that are replete with overt referential subject pronouns, whereas others contain very few, and the overt expletive ello appears in only a subset of the contexts where it is theoretically possible; moreover, the post-verbal position is employed, with greater frequency for pronominal than for full NP subjects, across the construction types discussed. In other words, Dominican Spanish exhibits properties of non-pro- drop languages (e.g., English, French) while at once demonstrating structures com- A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 32.5 mon to pro-drop languages (e.g., Standard Spanish, Italian). The co-existence of these typologies is readily observable in the speech samples produced by all of the speakers interviewed; consider in this respect the intra-dialectal variability exposed in the extended speech ?f the following speakers: (11) a. Dejeme yo contarle . . . Cuando Cl vino la primera vez, que vino con vein- tiocho mil dolares en papeletas y dijo que le iba a echar plata a la casa y yo le dije que no se le puede echar plata a la casa sin t6 hablar con 10s otros hermanos tuyos, i t6 oyes? porque despues cuando yo me muera, tu te vas a hater duefio de la casa td solo iy 10s otros que van a hater? . . . i Ay, ese hombre gasto un dinero ahi! . . . 1Y de luz que pagaba una canti- dad! Sin consumir la luz. Porque ello no hay luz, aqui no hay luz, no . . . Una vez le dijo ladron al jefe de la compafiia, porque no hay necesidad de que hayan apagones habiendo dinero. Ya agua hay, y va a haber mas agua todavia . . . Ya aqui no nos falta agua, ya aqui no nos falta agua . . . Y cuando conecte otra tuberia, habra en la llave ya, . . . si ello viene un poquitico ya en la llave ya . . . Yo me bebo yo solo un litro de Remi Mar- tin... a mi no me hate nada, y es lo unico que tengo. iT6 sabes que hago yo con mi cama? Me la preparo antes de yo ponerme a beber, por si acaso me emborrache. ‚Let me tell you . . . When he came for the first time, he came with twenty- eight thousand dollars in bills and said that he was going to come to invest money into the house and I told him that you can™t invest money into the house without you speaking with your brothers, you hear, because later when I die, you will become owner of the house all by yourself, and what will the others do? . . . Oh, that man spent a great deal of money there! . . . And in electricity he paid a huge amount! Without consuming electricity. Because there is no electricity, there is no electricity . . . One time he called the chief of the company a thief, because there is no need for there to be power outages when there is money. There is water now, and there will be more water yet . . . We don™t lack in water, we don™t lack water . . . And when I connect the other pipes, there will be (water) in the tap, . . . yes, there is already a little in the tap . . . I drink a liter of Remi Martin by myself . . . it does nothing to me, and it™s all I have. Do you know what I do with my bed? I prepare it before I set to drinking, just in case I get drunk.™ b. Si te pasaras un dia en mi trabajo, te dieres cuenta que la forma de yo hablar es una mezcla de todos 10s diferentes tipos de razas de paises. El problema es que donde yo trabajo es una farmacia y estoy ahi mas porque puedo hablar espafiol. Entonces hay muchas personas de diferentes paises y cuando llega una persona por decir, de Puerto Rico, pues yo tengo que saber coma es que ellos hablan y a que es que ellos se refieren cuando hablan de algo especifico, entonces cuando viene otra persona de, vamos a decir, de1 Sal- vador, que hablan tambien espafiol, yo tengo tambien que tratar de enten- derlos a ellos, entonces es un trabajo muy interesante. Y la gente me dice <<Per0 t6 no hablas coma 10s dominicanos>> . . . La pronunciation de 10s 326 A.J. Toribio I Lingw 110 (2000) 315-341 dominicanos, comparado con 10s otros paises es mas . . . no pronuncian bien las sflabas, las cortan, hablan diferente.9 ‚If you spent a day at my job, you would notice that my form of speaking is a mix of all of the different types of countries™ races. The problem is that where I work is a pharmacy and I am there more because I can speak Span- ish. Then there are many people from different countries and when someone arrives let™s say, from Puerto Rico, well I have to know how they speak and what it is they are referring to when they speak of something specific, then when another person comes from, let™s say, El Salvador, that also speak Spanish, I have also to try to understand them, so it™s a very interesting job. And people tell me ﬁBut you don™t speak like Dominicansﬂ . . . Dominicans™ pronunciation, compared with other countries is more . . . they don™t pro- nounce syllables, they cut them, they speak differently.™ Such i&a-dialectal variability will be central to the syntactic-theoretical analysis proffered in the ensuing discussion. 3. Characterizing dialectal variation within parametric limits As laid out, the linguistic patterns manifest in Dominican Spanish reveal that this dialect has expanded to encompass (phonological rules and) morpho-syntactic con- structions that are not uniformly reproduced in the dialects of other Latin American nations today. One might speculate that these innovations reflect the contributions of linguistic contact. However, such a conjecture is not borne out in the findings of extensive research reported in the literature. Remarking on the potential import from the African languages that were carried to the Caribbean region, Lipski (1994) reports that ﬁno major innovation in pronunciation, morphology or syntax in Latin American Spanish is due exclusively to the former presence of speakers of African languages or of any form of Afro-Hispanic language, creole or otherwise (1994: 133). And speaking specifically to Dominicans™ continued contact with the French- based creole of the adjoining nation, Lipski states, ﬁthe impact of Haitian Creole on Dominican Spanish is largely confined to the rural border region, and to life on the sugar plantationsﬂ (1994: 237). Finally, in like manner, JimCnez Sabater (1975 : 168) cautions against attributing the innovations to linguistic contact with English: ﬁEs de dudarse que estemos ante un fenomeno de interferencia de1 ingles o de ninguna otra lengua extranjera. Un rasgo morfosintactico tan caracterfstico dificilmente habrfa podido calar de modo tan profundo en una masa analfabeta coma la de nuestro pais, donde predomina, antes bien, el arcaismo castellano - o la evolution de tendencias linguisticas netamente hispanas - y en la que apenas se cuentan escasos prt%tamos lexicos de otros idiomas, por oposicidn a lo que sucede con otras zonas antillanas coma Puerto Rico en donde tarnbien es corriente este orden de palabrasﬂ (‚It is 9 This participant™s pronunciation and syntactic constructions were the most demonstrative of careful speech, perhaps owing to dialectal leveling. A.J. Torihio I Lingua 110 12000) 315-341 327 doubtful that we have before us a case of interference with English or any other for- eign language. A morpho-syntactic feature could have hardly reached so deeply into the illiterate mases of our country, where the linguistic tendencies lean towards the use of archaic Castillian forms or of typically Hispanic solutions and where lexical loans from other languages are rare and strikingly different from what occurs in other Caribbean areas like Puerto Rico where this word order is also common™). We must, therefore, look beyond cross-linguistic contact in explicating the presence of the attested linguistic forms. With notable exceptions, studies of dialectal variation and change have, in the main, fallen outside the purview of theoretical linguistics, within the realm of dialec- tology (cf. Milroy, 1992). To understand linguistic variation and change from a lin- guistic-theoretical perspective, we must understand the constraints on possible gram- mars offered by the nature of the language faculty, as put forth within linguistic theory, and in particular, within Principles and Parameters Theory (cf. the extensive research literature grounded in Chomsky, 1981, 1986). Developed by reference to careful and deliberate comparisons between languages, Principles and Parameters Theory has refined its conceptual apparatus to a well-articulated structure consisting of a core system of universal principles, with cross-linguistic variation ascribed to well-delimited parametric differences. However, the continued advancement of this research program remains largely uninformed by the facts of variation between or within dialects of the same language. For example, linguistic scholars investigating pro-drop have assumed that there exist languages such as Spanish and English that represent divergent settings.‚O The question arises as to whether, and if so, how the theory can accommodate differences found between and within dialects of a single community, as is the case in the Dominican Republic and in the Dominican diaspora (cf. Toribio, forthcoming). Considerations of parsimony dictate that the differences between Standard Latin American Spanish and Dominican Spanish should reflect possible grammatical dif- ferences, i.e., distinct choices of parameter settings, rather than unique language- and dialect-specific rules. In other words, the ways in which dialects differ (e.g., Domini- can Spanish versus Standard Latin American Spanish) should perfectly mirror the ways in which languages differ from one another (e.g., Standard Spanish versus Standard English or French). In fact, recent explorations of dialectal variation have revealed that dialects of languages in themselves have parameters, and as such, may also be defined within parametric limits (cf. Beninca, 1989; Kayne, 1994; Henry, 1995). For example, in examining dialects of English, Henry (1997) concludes that the kind of variation attested between Belfast English and Standard English is broadly of the same type as that found between different languages. Advancing this line of inquiry, Wilson and Henry (1998: 8) submit that ﬁif dialects do set their para- metric limits, then it would seem useful for theoretical linguists to take account of dialectal variation in explaining the necessity of linguistic diversity within Universal Grammar.ﬂ From the point of view of linguistic theory, then, there should be noth- lo We concur with Wilson and Henry (1998) that such abstraction is admissible and necessary, if we are to productively proceed in comparative research. 328 A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 31.5-341 ing special about dialect variation as distinct from language variation. Articulating this same view, Beninca (1989: 3): states, ﬁIn a linguistic group of interrelated dialects with little differentiation, we can expect to find realized only those possibil- ities which are admitted by the theory. It is evident, then, that the more the dialects are similar to one another, the more possible it becomes to find, for a specific gram- matical area, the ideal case of some dialects differing only in respect to phenomena that can be traced unambiguously to a single parameterﬂ. Such a mode of inquiry is appropriate in the analysis of the data presented herein: Dominican Spanish presents a clustering of properties not present in Standard Latin American Spanish, a clustering which, a priori, would point to the presence of a sec- ond, co-existing grammar. That is, when viewed from a properly typological per- spective, the linguistic patterns observed, which, as verified in previous and on- going research are systematically corroborated (cf. Toribio, 1993b, 1996), insinuate that Dominican Spanish is undergoing significant syntactic restructuring. The typo- logical distinctions exemplified in the dialect may be interpreted as pointing to gram- matical re-setting, ﬁun hecho perfectamente explicable dentro de las posibilidades que ofrece el mismo sistema espaiiolﬂ (‚a fact which is perfectly explainable within the possibilities that the self-same system of Spanish offers™) (Jimenez Sabater, 1975: 169). In other words, the complex of innovations is understood as circum- scribing a grammatical option made available within the language system (in fact, a typological distinction readily observed within the Romance language family - wit- ness the contrasts represented between Standard Spanish and French).™ l Before proceeding, however, it merits noting that although the co-existence of distinct grammars of the same language in a single speech community has eluded characterization within the confines of traditional synchronic syntactic analyses, descriptions of such linguistic phenomena have characterized much recent study of language change and development. The application of the Principles and Parameters approach to grammar to the study of historical change was instigated by Lightfoot (1979) and has had fruitful results (cf. the collection of papers compiled and edited by van Kemenade and Vincent, 1997). Especially relevant for the present purposes is the view advocated by authors such as Kroch (1991) and Roberts (1993), who sug- gest that in the change from a grammatical property X to a distinct grammatical property Y, a language may demonstrate both X and Y simultaneously.‚* On such a view, grammatical change is characterized by a transitional state of co-existing, competing grammars. A similar state of affairs has been addressed in language acquisition, a central, motivating issue in linguistic theorizing. Whereas language I™ Its linguistic-theoretical import notwithstanding, the investigation brings to light additional aspects of dialectal variation that merit scrutiny. For instance, are speakers aware of the linguistic novelty? If so, do they have a favorable judgment of the innovations? Would they abandon the vernacular for a more conservative variety? Questions as these were also explored in interviews with Dominicans in the Dominican Republic and in New York, and are reported in Toribio (forthcoming), which examines the affective and social factors that enter into language loyalty. I2 In Toribio (1993b), I develop and elaborate an analysis according to which Dominican Spanish makes available a dual setting of Nominative Case licensing: under the configurations of specifier-head agreement and strict c-command government. A.J. Torihio / Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 329 development has been generally assumed to result from the addition of new formal properties and the deletion of pre-existing representations, researchers such as Roeper (1996) have explored the possibility that the addition of a new feature may change the status of previous structures in the grammar, without obliterating them.13 In this technical and yet intuitive sense, Roeper concludes, all children exhibit a form of bi-lingualism in the course of acquisition. In fact, Roeper makes similar assertions regarding adult competence, suggesting that adult monolinguals too demonstrate ‚islands of bi-lingualism™, as manifested in the deployment of syntactic operations which are commonly perceived as circumscribing distinct speech modes (e.g., the formal preposing that produces forms such as whereafter). The previous observations converge in suggesting that a speaker™s linguistic com- petence may be characterized as representing distinct grammars of what is com- monly identified as a unitary language. And these self-same observations can be brought to bear on the present investigation into intra-dialectal variation or bi-dialec- talism. Dominican speakers may be said to have available I-languages representing stages of the change from what in the literature is identified as a canonical pro-drop typology (e.g., Standard Spanish-type null subjects and post-verbal subjects) to a non-pro-drop typology (e.g., English- or French-type overt subjects and pre-verbal subjects). Accordingly, we postulate that a dual parameter setting is indicated for speakers of Dominican Spanish, and we turn to consider these inter- and intra-dialec- tal differences as they relate to parametric limits. 4. Dialectal variation within the Minimalist Program The aforementioned syntactically informed assessments of dialectal variation motivate the analysis to be put forth. Dominican Spanish will be shown to be a source of facts pertinent to a theory of language, rather than a peculiar linguistic object that diverges from Standard Latin American Spanish. More specifically, the descriptive generalizations that emerge from the comparison of patterns observed within this dialect, and between Dominican Spanish and Standard Latin American Spanish, will be analyzed within Chomsky™s Minimalist Program, where linguistic variation is expressed in terms of strength of abstract morpho-syntactic features and (checking operations within) functional projections. l4 The proposal thus re-examines the traditional notion that inflectional morphology, null subjects, and positional con- straints are correlated in general syntactic derivations, but couches the inquiry within the Minimalist framework that has emerged in recent syntactic research. I3 Roeper suggests that such a conceptualization of language development would explain certain puz- zling patterns attested in the acquisition of inversion in English. He notes, for instance, that many chil- dren pass through a period in which inversion is optional: the utterance ‚What he can do?™ is heard alongside ‚What can he do?™ in the same stage. I4 An obvious limitation to the approach is how to interpret the notion of strength, since, as stated, there is apparently no necessary correlation between morphology and strength. 330 A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 4.1. The framework of analysis In his Minimalist Program, Chomsky (1993, 1995) proposes a simple and con- strained conceptualization of human language, in which the language faculty con- sists of two central components: a lexicon and a computational system. The compu- tational system is composed of invariant principles, with language-specific variation restricted to functional elements and general properties of the lexicon. The derivation of a particular linguistic expression involves a choice of items from the ,lexicon and a computation that constructs the interface representations - the articulatory-percep- tual representation (associated with Phonetic Form, PF) and the conceptual-inten- tional representation (associated with Logical Form, LF). Conditions on well- formedness determine which derivations and derived objects are licit and interpretable at the interface levels. While in earlier models lexical items were envisioned as being introduced in their base form and moving in the course of derivation to acquire morphological markings (e.g., NP-movement for Case-marking; verb-movement for affixation), in articulat- ing the Minimalist assumptions, Chomsky proposes that lexical items are selected from the lexicon fully endowed with their inflectional features, including phi-fea- tures, Case features, and scopal features. These inflectional features, collectively referred to as CASE features, must be checked against the specifications on func- tional nodes. This process of Morphological Checking is represented as a general- ized form of the CASE Filter: all CASE features must be checked. In the Minimal- ist Program, the morphological features on the nodes TENSE and AGR check properties of the verb that raises to (adjoin to) them, and they check properties of the NP that raises to their Specifier position. Specifically, TENSE checks the tense on the verb and the (nominative) Case on the subject NP; AGR checks the phi-features - features referencing person, number, gender, etc. - on the verb and its arguments. As the functional elements TENSE and AGR check the features of the verb and the associated NPs, they disappear, yielding only a verb and arguments that are paired. However, unlike the traditional Case Filter, which was assumed to hold at S-struc- ture, Morphological Checking may occur at any point in the derivation up to LF, as required. Whether checking takes place in overt syntax or in the LF component depends on the morphological strength attributed to the functional features. Follow- ing in the line of research initiated by Pollock (1989), Chomsky assumes that the features on TENSE and AGR may be weak or strong. Weak morphological features may survive into PF as they are invisible in this component. In contrast, strong mor- phological features are visible at PF, but are not proper components of PF, and would cause the derivation to crash. Therefore, strong morphological features must be checked and eliminated prior to Spell-Out, but weak morphological features remain after Spell-Out - in fact, by the economy principle duly termed Procrastinate, they must remain - and are checked instead at the level of LF, a less costly oper- ation. For Morphological Checking and convergence to occur, an element with some feature must be in a specific structural relation with a checker for that feature. The Checking Domain of a head comprises all elements included in its maximal projec- A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 331 tion, where inclusion is understood in the sense of Chomsky (1986), and thus includes adjuncts and Specifiers, but excludes elements contained within comple- ments of the head; schematically, the Checking Domain of X in (13) is {UP, ZP, WP, H} (Chomsky, 1995: 177-178). (13) & UP A /Z? A WP /ZPK X1 YP H X2 For the ensuing discussion, the important positions in the Checking Domain of X are SpecX, where nominal arguments will check Case and phi-features against X, and the position adjoined to X, since the verb will adjoin to functional heads to have its verbal features checked. By way of example, consider the checking of verbal features exemplified in the diagram in (14). Following the work Pollock (1989) and furthering his own earlier work (Chomsky, 1991), Chomsky articulates the traditional INFL(ection) node into AGR and TENSE, locating AGR above TENSE (omitted here are a possible phrase headed by the functional element NEG(ation), and the phrase headed by COMP). (14) Checking of verbal features AGR-P AGR™ AGR,,ﬂ TENSE-P TENSE™ 332 A.J. Toribio / Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 In order for the derivation to converge, AGR and TENSE must contain the same phi- features which appear on the verb. To check its agreement and tense features, the verb will raise to adjoin to AGR and TENSE before or after Spell-Out, the Head Movement Constraint of Travis (1984) respected. In languages such as English, the verbal features of TENSE and AGR are weak and hence may survive into PF with- out ill effect. Thus, as consistent with the principle Procrastinate, overt raising prior to PF is barred, and as a consequence, English main verbs are realized within the VP. As discussed, AGR and TENSE also contain nominal features - the phi-features and Case features - which will be checked off against the corresponding inflectional features of NPs. To check its AGR and TENSE features, the subject NP will raise to the TENSE and AGR projections, as shown in (15): (15) Checking of nominal features AGR-P VU . .™ In English, the nominal features of AGR are weak and may appear at PF. In contrast, the nominal features of TENSE are strong, and therefore, raising of the subject NP to SpecTENSE occurs prior to Spell-Out. In this way, the Extended Projection Prin- ciple of earlier approaches reduces to a morphological property of TENSE in the Minimalist Program.*5 I5 Chomsky assumes the existence of an AGR projection to which objects will raise; this AGR-o posi- tion immediately dominates VP. The projection is omitted from the representation in (15), as it is not rel- evant to the present discussion. However, it merits mentioning that there is no intrinsic distinction between the features that are contained in the AGR projection above TENSE-P (AGR-s), to which sub- jects raise, and the AGR-o projection. Thus, like subjects, objects do not raise to SpecAGR before Spell- Out in English. A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 333 4.2. Feature specification in Standard Latin American Spanish and Dominican Spanish Within the restricted framework of Minimalist Program, differences between lan- guages and language varieties are attributed to aspects of the lexicon and to the dif- ferences in the morphological features of the lexical elements which occupy func- tional category nodes. As explained, the strength of verbal and nominal features of AGR and TENSE varies independently, determining distinct language types (of course, other nodes are involved in linguistic variation, most notably among these, the COMP node, not considered here). In the ensuing paragraphs, we consider how the facts of Standard Latin American Spanish and the variation attested in the Span- ish of the Dominican Republic are accommodated within the parameters of the Min- imalist Program. Data concerning the placement of adverbs and negative markers provides evi- dence of overt verb-raising in Standard Latin American Spanish (cf. Sufier, 1994). As movement is triggered by strong features, we assume that the verbal features of AGR and TENSE are strong, ensuring that the verb will raise into these functional projections prior to Spell-Out. When the verbal features of these inflectional heads have checked the features on the lexical item, they disappear. If the verb does not raise to AGR and TENSE overtly, the strong verbal features survive to PF, render- ing the derivation illicit. Therefore, overt raising is a prerequisite for convergence in Standard Latin American Spanish. Recall that the morphological features of AGR and TENSE serve a second func- tion, additionally checking the properties of the nominal that raises to their Specifier position. The nominal features of AGR check the phi-features of NP in SpecAGR; the nominal features of TENSE check the (nominative) Case features of NP in SpecTENSE. The nominal features of AGR also play a role in determining the avail- ability of null subjects. Chomsky proposes that strong nominal AGR features are a prerequisite for null subjects. As Standard Latin American Spanish allows null sub- jects, we assume that the nominal features of AGR are strong. Since the nominal fea- tures on AGR are strong, all subject NPs, both null and overt, must raise to SpecAGR prior to Spell-Out to ensure convergence. However, since Standard Latin American Spanish permits VSO word order as an alternative to SVO in declaratives (as determined by theme/rheme considerations), we make the crucial assumption that TENSE dominates AGR in Spanish; a similar proposal is set forth by Pollock (1989) for French. Such a reordering of the functional nodes is straightforward and conso- nant with Minimalist assumptions: feature strength on functional nodes is one ele- ment of language variation, relative positioning of these functional nodes is another. In (16), then, the verb, drawn from the lexicon fully inflected, adjoins first to AGR where its phi-features are checked, and then to TENSE, where its tense fea- tures are checked. The raising of V takes place prior to Spell-Out, triggered by strong verbal features on the functional nodes. The subject NP raises from its posi- tion internal to the VP into SpecAGR, where its phi-features are checked. As the nominal features of AGR are strong (licensing null subjects), raising takes place overtly. In contrast, the nominal features on TENSE are weak and may appear at PF 334 A ..I. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 without causing a crash. Since convergence is compatible with Procrastinate, raising of the subject is delayed until LF (note that since the SpecTENSE position is not filled prior to Spell-Out, it is not projected). In accordance with this derivation, a subject NP will be realized in post-verbal position. (16) Standard Latin American Spanish, with overt lexical subject TENSE-P TENSE™ V+AGR+T AGR-P The analysis presented thus far, although adequately accounting for the patterns of word-order in Standard Latin American Spanish, do not fully account for the avail- ability of null subjects. Strong nominal features on AGR are a necessary but insuffi- cient condition for the licensing a null subject; the features of TENSE are also rele- vant to the licensing of null subjects. This intuition underlies Rizzi™s (1986) theory on null subjects, according to which the formal licensing (associated with Case- marking) and identification of null pronouns are achieved by the same source. Updating Rizzi™s theory, Chomsky claims that ﬁpro is licensed only in the Spec- head relation to [*sr a Agr], where a is [+tense] or V, Agr strong or V=V*ﬁ, a spe- cial class of verbs (1995: 176). As shown in (17), the verb raises to check off the verbal features of AGR and TENSE which are strong. As the nominal features of AGR are also strong, verb raising creates the [TENSE+AGR] complex required in the licensing of null subjects. The pro subject raises to SpecAGR, where it checks off strong nominal AGR features; raising of pro to SpecTENSE for Morphological Checking is precluded, as the nominal features of TENSE are weak. (17) Standard Latin American Spanish, with pro subject A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 335 TENSE-P Pro TENSE™ V+AGR+T AGR-P Nevertheless, we postulate that pro does raise to SpecTENSE. In Minimalist terms, raising is motivated by a ‚self-serving last restort™ strategy, the principle of Greed (Chomsky, 1995: 201): raising of pro to SpecTENSE applies because it must, as required by pro theorem. Notably, raising of overt subjects is obviated on consider- ations of economy. l6 Now, we have observed that in the Minimalist Program Universal Grammar spec- ifies the interface levels, the elements that constitute these levels and the computa- tions by which they are constructed. Language variation in this program is deter- mined by variation in the PF component and in aspects of the lexicon. For basic parametric differences in constituent ordering and in the licensing of null subjects, Chomsky looks to the AGR and TENSE nodes and their verbal and nominal fea- tures. Along the lines discussed, the placement of the verb relative to other elements of the sentence reveals important clues as to the nature of the functional heads TENSE and AGR in Dominican Spanish. As with Standard Latin American Spanish, in which the verbal features of TENSE and AGR are strong, and will be visible if not checked off, in Dominican Spanish main verbs must raise to AGR and TENSE before Spell-Out. Thus, we will not invoke the strength of verbal features in account- I6 Toribio (1996) presents an alternative proposal for achieving the requisite configuration for the licensing of pro: weak nominal TENSE features are absorbed by the strong nominal AGR features; such ‚lowering™ of TENSE features would create the [,srTENSE+AGR] complex which will license the null subject in SpecAGR. On such a view, the verbal features of TENSE should also be absorbed by AGR, precluding the raising of the verb to the TENSE-adjunction position, an issue which is not addressed therein. It merits not- ing that this transfer of TENSE features may be implicated in accounting for the A-bar status of SpecT in Standard Latin American Spanish (cf. Toribio 1993a,b). Such a line of inquiry would be contrary to the view put forth by Chomsky, who argues that it is the verbal features of TENSE and AGR, together labeled L-fea- tures, which determine the status of a position: a structural position that is narrowly L-related, i.e., non- adjoined, has the basic properties of an A-position. Nevertheless, the proposal here presents a viable and appealing mechanism for explaining the many interrelated syntactic properties that characterize this dialect. 336 A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 ing for the linguistic innovations. Still in keeping with Minimalist assumptions, then, we turn to consider the nominal features of TENSE and AGR in accounting for the attested variability. Chomsky notes that a language might allow both weak and strong nominal features (1995: 199). He points out, in particular, that Arabic demonstrates a VSO and SVO pattern which correlates directly with richness of verbal inflection. However, unlike what is observed in Arabic, post-verbal subjects in Dominican Spanish do not corre- late with richness of inflection; that is, rather than demonstrating a stable and trans- parent system, this dialect represents a grammar which is in the process of restructur- ing. Assume that in Dominican Spanish AGR incorporates weak nominal features. This morphological property has two effects: overt raising of NP to SpecAGR is pre- cluded on grounds of economy, and null subjects cannot be licensed, as AGR is not endowed with the requisite phi-features. As discussed, this morphological property (let™s call it ‚B™) exists alongside the setting which is attested also in Standard Latin American Spanish (property ‚A™). The same considerations extend to the nominal fea- tures of TENSE: Dominican Spanish TENSE incorporates strong nominal features. This means that this dialect will demonstrate both overt raising of NP to SpecT (con- sonant with the innovative property B), alongside short movement of NP to SpecAGR, as dictated by the weak nominal specification of TENSE (the ‚older™ property, A). Taking property A to be a nominal feature specification, we assume that it is iden- tical in Standard Latin American Spanish and Dominican Spanish. Property B, the innovation, is the property of interest to us here. The derivations which Dominican Spanish shares with Standard Latin American Spanish were shown in (16) and (17); the derivation which are determined by the innovative feature specifications is illus- trated in (18). The SpecAGR position remains empty prior to Spell-Out - it is not warranted on the grounds of Morphological Checking - and is not projected. (18) Dominican Spanish, with weak nominal AGR features and strong nominal TENSE features TENSE-P NP m TENSE™ V AGR-P A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 337 The formerly weak nominal TENSE features became strong, and the formerly strong nominal AGR features became weak, entailing the loss of the null subject and the loss of post-verbal subject order licensed in (17). As proposed, the derivation in (18), in which the nominal features of AGR are weak and the nominal features of TENSE are strong, exists alongside the derivation in (17), with the opposite nominal feature specifications on AGR and TENSE, accounting for apparently contradictory data such as that presented in the speech samples throughout, and in particular those in (1 l), where, within individual speak- ers™ productions, we observed distinct typological tendencies; selected data pairs from these excerpts are contrasted in (19) and (19™): (19) Parameter setting represented in (17) Null Subjects : a. . . . vino con veintiocho mil ddlares . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚ . . . he came with twenty-eight thousand dollars™ b . . . . no se le puede echar plata . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚ . . . you can™t invest money . . . ™ c. . . . y dijo que le iba a echar plata . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚ . . . and he said he would invest money . . . ™ d. . . . aqui no hay luz, no. (Speaker 1 la) ‚ . . . there is no electricity here.™ e. . . . no hay necesidad . . . (Speaker 11 a) ‚ . . . there is no need . . . ™ f. . . . va a haber m&s agua . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚ . . . there will be more water . . . ™ g. . . . a mi no me hate nada, y es lo unico que tengo. (Speaker 1 la) ‚ . . . it does nothing to me, and it is all I have.™ h. En mi trabajo se requiere . . . (Speaker 11 b) ‚In my job it is required . . . ™ i. Si te pasaras un dfa en mi trabajo, te dieres cuenta . . . (Speaker 11 b) ‚If you spent a day at my job, you would notice . . . ™ Post-verbal Subjects: j. . . . de que hayan apagones . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚ . . . that there be blackouts . . . ™ k. . . . que hago yo . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚what I do . . . ™ 1. . . . cuando llega una persona . . . (Speaker 1 lb) ‚ . . . when someone arrives . . . ™ (19™) Parameter setting represented in (18) Overt Subjects : a. Cuando Cl vino la primera vez . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚When he came for the first time . . . ™ 338 A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 b. . . . y yo le dije que . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚ . . . and I told him that . ..™ c. . . . cuando yo me muera, td te vas a hater duefio . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚ . . . when I die, you will become owner . . . ™ d. Porque ello no hay luz . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚Because there is no electricity . . .™ e. . . . ello viene un poquitico ya en la llave ya . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚there comes a little in the tap now . . .™ f. Yo me bebo yo solo un litro . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚I drink a liter myself . . . ™ g. . . . que yo hable espaiiol. (Speaker 1 lb) ‚ . . . that I speak Spanish.™ h. Entonces yo trato de que . . . (Speaker 11 b) ‚Then I try to . ..™ i. . . . tti sabes . . . (Speaker 11 b) ‚... you know . ..™ Preverbal Subjects: j. . . . sin tti hablar con 10s otros hermanos tuyos . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚ . . . without you speaking with your brothers . . . ™ k. . . . antes de yo ponerme a beber . . . (Speaker 1 la) ‚... before I set to drinking . ..™ 1. . . . la forma de yo hablar es una mezcla . . . (Speaker 1 lb) ‚ . . . thewayIspeakisamix . ..™ m . . . . donde yo trabajo . . . (Speaker 1 lb) ‚ . . . where I work . . . ™ n. . . . coma es que ellos hablan . . . (Speaker 1 lb) ‚... how it is that they speak . ..™ 0. . . . y a quC es que ellos se refieren . . . (Speaker 1 lb) ‚ . . . and what it is they refer to . . . ™ Notice that the data items in (19) and (19™) are comparable in structure, and, more importantly, are drawn from the speech of the same speakers - speakers employ the null and overt subjects and post- and pre-verbal subjects freely, as expected if their grammars include dual specifications on TENSE and AGR. 4.3. Summary of the analysis The proposal that has been presented herein is in keeping with central Minimalist premises, according to which the task of the language learner is to assemble the appropriate set of functional features on lexical items to drive the computational sys- tem of the grammar. Therefore, in a non-trivial sense, language variation and change represents the addition and reorganization of abstract feature specifications on lexi- cal items and functional projections. Such a conceptualization is successfully invoked in explaining the apparently contradictory patterns attested in Dominican A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 339 Spanish - Dominican Spanish as demonstrating overt/pre-verbal subjects and null/post-verbal subjects at once. The contradiction is resolved if we assume that lex- ical items and functional projections may be specified as bearing weak nominal TENSE and strong nominal AGR features, or they may be marked as bearing the opposite specifications, namely, strong nominal TENSE and weak nominal AGR features. Thus, speakers of Dominican Spanish may be characterized as bi-lingual, demonstrating two distinct grammars, with contrasting TENSE and AGR feature specifications; the intralingual shift in TENSE and AGR features entails the pres- ence or absence of particular syntactic derivations. 5. Conclusion We have reviewed several types of synchronic evidence that converge in demon- strating that Dominican Spanish differs in significant respects from other Latin American Spanish varieties, and that the Dominican vernacular itself demonstrates notable intra-dialectal variability. In our analysis of these data, we have argued that the ways in which Dominican Spanish differs from Standard Latin American Span- ish mirror the ways in which languages differ from one another, namely, within parametric limits. Dominican Spanish is distinguished as incorporating strong nomi- nal TENSE and weak nominal AGR features, licensing derivations that incorporate overt pronominals and pre-verbal subjects. Moreover, the intra-dialectal variability noted in the speech samples collected, and corroborated in the extensive research lit- erature, indicates that the dialect additionally presents weak nominal TENSE and strong nominal AGR features, motivating structures in which the normative null sub- jects and pre-verbal positioning are also licit. Accordingly, it has been argued that speakers of Dominican Spanish may acquire an I-language that is variable between parameter settings (strong versus weak) of nominal TENSE and AGR features. On this view, speakers are bi-lingual in their native language, acquiring two grammars with opposed, competing values for the relevant parameters. The availability of the ‚old™ forms (Standard Spanish-type pro- drop properties licensed by strong nominal AGR and weak nominal TENSE) along- side the innovations (English- and French-type non-pro-drop properties licensed by weak nominal AGR and strong nominal TENSE) is a state of affairs that typifies lin- guistic change in progress. Thus, though Dominican Spanish has maintained null pronouns and post-verbal subjects, hallmarks of pro-drop language typology, the possibility may be disappearing, and the prognosis for this regional vernacular is not in the introduction of the non-pro-drop patterns (overt subjects and fixed positional licensing, which are already in evidence), but in the suppression and subsequent loss of the older competing structures. The present work has successfully endeavored to synthesize and elucidate the apparently contradictory grammatical forms attested in a dialect of Spanish. But the larger contributions of the work are manifold. The analysis advanced lends addi- tional empirical support to the proposal put forth by Henry and Wilson regarding parametric limits of variation within dialects of the same language, and makes more 340 A.J. Toribio I Lingua 110 (2000) 315-341 precise the early formulations of the application of Principles and Parameters Theory to dialectal variation. Likewise, the proposal proffered brings the findings of researchers in historical change and language acquisition to bear on synchronic analyses. Finally, the neat accommodation of these observations on linguistic varia- tion and change within Chomsky™s restricted theory of Minimalism makes evident the potential import of dialectology to syntactic theory. References Benin& P., 1989. Dialect variation and the theory of grammar. Dordrecht: Foris. Borer, H., 1986. I-subjects. Linguistic Inquiry 17, 375416. Cameron, R., 1992. Pronominal and null subject variation in Spanish: Constraints, dialects and func- tional compensation. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. Chomsky, N., 1981. Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris. Chomsky, N., 1986. Barriers. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1991. Some notes on economy of derivation and representation. MIT Working Papers in Linguistics 10,43-74. Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Chomsky, N., 1993. A minimalist program for linguistic theory. In: K. Hale and S.J. Keyser (eds.), The view from building 20, l-52. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Garcia, O., I. Evangelista, M. Martinez, C. Disla and B. Paulino, 1988. Spanish language use and atti- tudes: A study of two New York City communities. Language and Society 17,475-511. Gilligan, G., 1987. A cross-linguistic approach to the pro-drop parameter. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA. Harris, J., 1983. Spanish phonology. MIT Press: Cambridge. Henrfquez UreAa, P., 1940. El EspaAol en Santa Domingo. Buenos Aires: Biblioteca de Dialectologia Hispanomericana V. Henry, A., 1995. Belfast English and Standard English. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Henry, A., 1997. Viewing change in progress: The loss of V2 in Hibemo-English imperatives. In: A. van Kemenade and N. Vincent (eds.), Parameters of morphosyntactic change, 273-296. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hermon, G. and J. Yoon, 1989. The licensing and identification of PRO and the typology of AGR. In: ?. Wiltshire, R. Graczyk and B. Music (eds.), Papers from the 25th Annual Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society, 174-192. Hochberg, J., 1986. Functional compensation for /s/ deletion in Puerto Rican Spanish. Language 62, 609621. Huang, C.-T.J., 1984. On the distribution and reference of empty pronouns. Linguistic Inquiry 15: 531-574. Jaeggli, 0. and K. Safir, 1989. The null subject parameter and parametric theory. In: 0. Jaeggli and K. Safir (eds.), The Null subject parameter, 14t. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Jimenez Sabater, M., 1975. Mas datos sobre el Espahol de la Republica Dominicana. Santo Domingo: Intec. Johnson, K., 1998. Dominican cultural and racial identity. Senior honors thesis, Program in Latin Amer- ican and Iberian Studies, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA. Kayne, R., 1994. The antisymmetry of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. van Kemenade, A. and N. Vincent., 1997. Parameters of morphosyntactic change. Cambridge: Cam- bridge University Press. Kroch, A., 1991. Reflexes of grammar in patterns of language change. Language Variation and Change 1.199-244. Lightfoot, D., 1979. Principles of diachronic syntax. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lipski, J., 1977. Preposed subjects in questions: Some considerations. Hispania 60, 61-67. A.J. Tori&o I Lingua 110 (2000) 31.5-341 341 Lipski, J., 1994. Latin American Spanish. New York: Longman Linguistics Library. McCloskey, J. and K. Hale, 1984. On the syntax of person-number inflection in Modem Irish. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 1,442487. Milroy, J., 1992. Processes of linguistic change. Oxford: Blackwell. Platzack, C., 1987. The Scadinavian languages and the null-subject parameter. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 5, 377-401. Pollock, J.-Y., 1989. Verb-movement, UG and the structure of IP. Linguistic Inquiry 20, 365424. Rizzi, L., 1982. Issues in Italian syntax. Dordrecht: Foris. Rizzi, L 1986. Null objects in Italian and the theory of pro. Linguistic Inquiry 17, 501-557. Roberts, I., 1993. Verbs and diachronic syntax. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Roeper, T., 1996. Is bi-lingualism universal? A view from first language acquisition. Ms., University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Safir, K., 1985. Syntactic Chains. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. SigurOsson, H.A., 1989. Verbal syntax and case in Icelandic. Ph.D. dissertation, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. Sigur&son, H.A., 1993. Argument-drop in Old Icelandic. Lingua 89: 247-280. Suiier, M., 1994. V-movement and the licensing of argumental wh-phrases in Spanish. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 12, 335-372. Sutier, M. and C. Lizardi., 1995. Dialectal variation in an argumental/non-argumental asymmetry in Spanish. In: J. Amastae, G. Goodall, M. Montalbetti and M. Phinney (eds.), Contemporary research in romance linguistics, 187-203. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Taraldsen, K., 1978. On the nominative island condition, vacuous application and the that-trace filter. Bloomington, IN: IULC. Toribio, A.J., 1990. A-bar movement in Spanish: Wh-questions, focalization and relative clauses. In: Y. No and M. Libucha (eds.), Proceedings of the Seventh Eastern States Conference on Linguistics 8, 535-548. Toribio, A.J., 1992. Proper government in Spanish subject relativization. Probus: International Journal of Latin and Romance Languages 3, 291-304. Toribio, A.J., 1993a. Lexical subjects in finite and non-finite clauses. Cornell Working Papers in Lin- guistics 11, 149-178. Department of Linguistics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY. Toribio, A.J., 1993b. Parametric variation in the licensing of nominals. Ph.D. dissertation, Cornell Uni- versity, Ithaca, NY. Toribio, A.J., 1996. Dialectal variation in the licensing of null referential and expletive pronouns. In: C. Parodi, C. Quicoli and M. Saltarelli (eds.), Aspects of Romance linguistics, 409432. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. Travis, L., 1984. Parameters and effects of word order variation. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA. Wilson, J. and A. Henry, 1998. Parameter setting within a socially realistic linguistics. Language in Soci- ety 27, 1-21. 