ELSEVIER Lingua 110(2000)375-378 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Book review Jim Miller and Regina Weinert, Spontaneous spoken language: Syntax and dis- course. Oxford: Clarendon, 1998. 457 pp. Reviewed by George Yule, Kaaawa, Hawaii 96730-0550, USA. This is an unusual book. It incorporates two analytic pursuits in linguistics, those associated with syntax and discourse (as in the subtitle), that are not normally under- taken at the same time. Indeed, it is as if the authors Miller and Weinert have taken up a position on a high mountain ridge that normally forms an insurmountable bar- rier between two valleys. One valley is occupied by a tribe of hunter-gatherers that we might call the Spoda (spoken discourse analysts) and the other is home to a more settled group that we™ll call the Gengra (generative grammarians). The valley of the Spoda appears to be a muddy, overgrown, largely unexplored area that is in sharp contrast to the rather tidy, well-tended landscape found in the valley of the Gengra. From their elevated position, Miller and Weinert present a detailed report on the findings of several expeditions into the valley of the Spoda and use that report to challenge a large number of assumptions, particularly those associated with the Gen- gra and their high priest, Chomsky, on what constitutes a valley. It seems that the area of the Spoda had been considered degenerate and hence irrelevant to the serious task of analyzing the fundamental properties of a valley, these properties having been considered more accessible to the Gengra without leaving their own tidy space. Miller and Weinert present their findings in this book and argue for a fundamentally different approach to valley study for many theoretical and practical reasons. More prosaically, Miller and Weinert present a report on some syntactic structures and discourse devices that are characteristic of spontaneous spoken language in a primary database of Scottish English, with additional exemplification from German, Russian, and, to a lesser extent, from other languages such as French and some lan- guages of Australia. They use that report as a basis for proposing a reconsideration of how certain topics, such as typology and first language acquisition, should be approached. A major theme of the editorializing passages of this book is the over- whelming yet inappropriate use of complex written language sentences, rather than spontaneous utterances, in most syntactic analyses, in considerations of language typology, in studies of first language acquisition, and in discussions about the role of language in education. The primary and motivating complaint of the work is that, on the basis of a syntactic analysis of complex, edited sentential artifacts (herein called 0378-2166/00/$ - see front matter 0 2000 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(99)00042-X 316 Book review I Lingua 110 (2000) 375-378 ‚magnasyntax™, p. 376), a highly influential group of linguists has dominated think- ing on how children acquire relatively simple spontaneous spoken language utter- ances in context. The analytic misdirections attributable to magnasyntax are detailed in the two final chapters (7 and 8). The valuable linguistic work concerning the sub- ject of the book™s title can be found in the earlier chapters. It may prove most rewarding for many readers to focus on the painstaking and highly original linguis- tic analyses of aspects of the syntactic structure of spontaneous speech presented in chapters 3 to 6. The introductory chapter establishes Miller and Weinert™s specific concerns. They are investigating aspects of the structure of spontaneous spoken language, but not its phonology nor its paralinguistic features. They distinguish between language as product and language as process, wishing to analyze structures as they are being cre- ated. They explain why they attempted to avoid collecting the spoken language of those individuals whose speech is very much influenced by written language. They particularly emphasize an intention ﬁto investigate spontaneous speech produced by people with no higher educationﬂ (p. 13). Indeed, they note that previous studies of spoken language, using data collected in university settings, inevitably found fewer differences between spoken and written language than they will report. They provide a general list of key properties of spontaneous spoken language and a description of their different database sources. These include conversations, task-based dialogues and interview data (in Scottish English), along with comparable collections of spo- ken data from Russian and German. Chapter 2 provides some very convincing arguments, with extensive historical and cross-linguistic exemplification, that the sentence is not an appropriate unit of syntactic analysis for spontaneous spoken language. The authors propose that ﬁthe clause should be taken as the major locus of distributional and dependency rela- tionsﬂ (p. 46). Their examples of what they describe as ‚fragmented syntax™ (p. 58), extracted from Italian, English and Russian, often appear to be produced as an unin- tegrated succession of phrases rather than the type of clause complexes that are more familiar from written language syntax. Chapter 3 takes up the analysis of clause types in spontaneous speech from sev- eral languages, demonstrating similarities in patterns of combination and integration. Missing are the subordinating conjunctions and other explicit linking devices found in written sentences. Instead, the constraints of on-line processing of speech result in smaller units, bounded by pauses, and co-ordinated rather than subordinated. A key exemplar of this phenomenon is the higher frequency of direct speech reporting (‚Brenda passed the message over to me when I kick you knock the cup into Andrew™s face™, p. 83) without the subordinating structures associated with indirect speech reporting. There is a lot of numerical data presented in this chapter, on pro- portions of BE and GET passives, finite and non-finite subordinate clauses, comple- ments, adverbial clauses and relative clauses. The extended discussion of relative clause constructions may prove the most revealing for many readers, detailing for example the typical appearance of shadow pronouns and a preference for that + pos- sessive pronoun rather than whose (e.g., ‚the girl that her birthday was on that day was stoned™, p. 106). Similar features are exemplified in data from French, German, Book review I Lingua 109 (2000) 375-378 311 Bengali, Russian, Kuniyanti and Diyari. The chapter concludes with a description of cleft constructions. Miller and Weinert admit that ﬁthe data presented in this chapter does not make easy readingﬂ (p. 132), but they really have provided a very insight- ful review of a large number of clause structures in spontaneous spoken language. Chapter 4 is devoted to noun phrases (NPs), beginning with a brief description of the complexity of NPs typically found in written language. This is followed by a helpful summary of the features of NPs in spoken language (pp. 139-142). The most general observation is that, in speech, NPs are much less complex, contain fewer adjectives, phrases and clauses, and often consist of a single constituent. There are extended micro-analyses of the NPs in one speaker™s narrative, a conversation, and, in contrast, some letters to a British newspaper. A comparable analysis is undertaken with some Russian and German data. The chapter concludes with a theoretical dis- cussion on the status of heads of construction, prompted mainly by split NP struc- tures in Russian. Perhaps more intriguing for those who study spontaneous spoken language is an issue that arises in connection with a relatively complex NP that occurs, non-typically, in the spoken narrative. In discussing this example, Miller and Weinert raise the question, ﬁwhat do we mean by ‚spontaneous™ when we talk of ‚spontaneous speech™? ﬂ (p. 150). Miller and Weinert note that the recorded speaker was describing a major event in her life and had probably related the details of the experience on previous occasions. In a sense, this ‚spontaneous™ talk had actually been rehearsed through previous tellings. Miller and Weinert do not pursue this issue, but it clearly has methodological implications for future researchers who might need to make distinctions within a range of types of speech that all qualify as ‚spontaneous.™ Chapters 5 and 6 move on from considerations of clause and phrase structure to different types of focus constructions in the data. Chapter 5 provides a general review of highlighting constructions. In their attempt to capture what speakers actu- ally do under the analytic rubric of ‚focus™, Miller and Weinert have to ﬁappeal repeatedly to the concept of constituents standing out from the surrounding con- stituentsﬂ (p. 193). They also note that certain other constituents are made less prominent than their surroundings. After establishing some basic analytic concepts, with a brief review of some of the discourse literature, Miller and Weinert move on to an illustration of how micro- and macro-focus works in a Russian text. They con- tinue with a discussion of how given information is marked, especially through ellip- sis and null NPs in Russian. In their review of highlighting devices, Miller and Weinert first note the use of presentational structures, then illustrate two distinctly Scottish foregrounding constructions involving SEE and KNOW, as in ‚see Mr. Y he™s got rid of whatsername the old secretary™ (p. 235). Another distinct construction for highlighting new propositions is ‚the thing is™ (p. 243) and variants. A number of other devices are identified cross-linguistically, with particular emphasis on Russian examples, that Miller and Weinert claim as evidence for very general processes of marking foreground and background information. Chapter 6 has a more specific examination of cleft constructions and (Scottish) English constructions with LIKE. Miller and Weinert point out that clefts are rela- tively rare in their data and not used as much as the discourse particles SEE and 378 Book review / Lingua 110 (2000) 375-378 LIKE. They pay particular attention to what they describe as reverse WH-clefts, as illustrated in ‚THAT™s what we did FIRST of all™ (p. 278) and note their anaphoric and attention-marking function. They also point to the fact that in ‚on-the-hoof™ spo- ken discourse (p. 279), there are functional demands fulfilled by structures that are less common in written language production. There is an extended discussion of focus devices in German. A lengthy consideration of LIKE is used to show that this distinctly spoken discourse organizing device is not simply a pause filler, but, is a means of non-contrastive focus. In their analysis of the many extracts used to sup- port the focusing analysis of LIKE, Miller and Weinert do not mention the co-occur- ring expressions ‚sort of™ and ‚I mean™ which seem to hint at a possible non-face- threatening interpersonal function for this particle. Indeed, considerations of interpersonal function are generally under-represented in the book. Miller and Wein- ert conclude that LIKE must be acquired late because it is ﬁlacking in the dialogues from the younger participantsﬂ (p. 320). We might actually treat this type of claim as a hypothesis that could be tested by further research. The final two chapters move away from the fine-grained analysis of data samples and focus on issues of typology (Chapter 7) and first language acquisition (Chapter 8). The major position argued and illustrated in Chapter 7 is that when linguists have made typological conclusions about languages, they have failed to take into account the substantial syntactic differences between spoken and written varieties. On the basis of their findings, Miller and Weinert point out that ﬁthe spontaneous spoken variety of a given language may differ in certain typological respects from the writ- ten varietyﬂ (p. 372). The major point argued in Chapter 8 is that Chomsky™s theory of language acqui- sition is based on a written language model and cannot apply to the process of spon- taneous spoken language acquisition experienced by children. Miller and Weinert are particularly concerned that ﬁwritten data produced by highly sophisticated users of written language playing intricate games with the grammatical code out of con- textﬂ (p. 375) has been considered the primary data for acquisition claims. They point to the non-degenerate nature of spoken language, the existence of formulaic constructions, the late acquisition of written language structures, and many other details in a polemic that extends to issues of literacy and education. In an epilogue, Miller and Weinert encourage all scholars to reconsider many of their assumptions about language that are based solely on a highly educated written language model. This book certainly provides a challenging and informative basis for undertaking that revision. 