ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 www.elsevier.nl/bcate/lingua Predication, verb movement and the distribution of expletives Olaf KoenemaP, Ad Neelemanb-* o Utrecht Institute of Linguistics OTS, Utrecht University, Trans 10.3512 JK Utrecht, The Netherlands h Department of Phonetics and Linguistics, University College London, Gower Street, London WClE 6BT, United Kingdom Received 6 November 1999; revised version 20 July 2000 Abstract This paper argues that predication theory is instrumental in capturing the distribution of expletives. (i) In interaction with well-known verb movement parameters, predication theory explains why not all languages have transitive expletive constructions. Conditions on the assignment of external thematic roles have the effect that the functional domain of a clause is only large enough to host both an expletive and a subject if the verb undergoes verb second as well as V to I. (ii) On the assumption that sufficiently rich inflection is argumental, predi- cation theory also provides a trigger for V to I. It is argued that, after verb movement, I can be interpreted as VP™s subject. This explains why rich inflection blocks expletive insertion within the verb™s predicational domain. (iii) Finally, predication theory forces an analysis of NP raising as predicate formation. As a result, NP raising is optional in many languages, even if no expletive is inserted. 0 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Predication; Verb movement; Functional projection; Expletives; Rich inflection; NP raising; Chain formation; Unmotivated movement 1. Introduction As is well known, some languages have transitive expletive constructions (hence- forth TECS), while others do not. The contrast is illustrated in (1) for Icelandic and Danish: * E-mail: koeneman@let.ruu.nl; ad@Iing.ucl.ac.uk 0378~2166/01/$ - see front matter 0 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00030-9 190 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 (1) a. b. Pack hafa margir jdlasveinar borZIa6 btibing there have many Santa Clauses eaten pudding *Der har nogen spist et able there has someone eaten an apple Icelandic Danish Danish does not lack expletive constructions altogether. The example in (2) with an ergative verb, is grammatical. (2) Der er kommet en dreng there is come a boy Danish Recent analyses assume that languages with TECS are richer in functional structure than languages in which TECS are ungrammatical. Bobaljik and Jonas (1996), for instance, propose that for a TEC to be well formed there must be two specifier posi- tions in the functional domain between CP and VP, one for the subject and one for the expletive. In Danish one of these specifiers is absent, at least in overt syntax. Thus, Bobaljik and Jonas assume that although all languages have the same set of functional projections, they may lack certain specifier positions. Bobaljik and Thrainsson (1998) take a more radical view. They argue that Ice- landic and Danish sentences contain a different number of functional projections. Danish realizes tense and agreement in a single projection, whereas Icelandic pro- jects separate tense and agreement phrases. In the case of joint projection of tense and agreement, the number of specifiers is not sufficient to project a TEC. Bobaljik and Thrainsson, then, assume that languages may employ a different set of functional projections, a claim made earlier by Platzack (1983), Iatridou (1990) and Grimshaw (1995). Although this is, we believe, an attractive approach to lan- guage variation, it raises the question of what determines the size of the functional domain in a particular language. The answer we propose is very simple: projection is licensed by overt heads. If languages differ in the amount of functional projections that they generate, functional projections must be acquired. Reasonable restrictions on language acqui- sition imply that consistently empty heads will not be postulated by the child. This does not mean that empty heads do not exist. In specific contexts the phonetic con- tent of a head may be deleted: Complementizers in a doubly-filled COMP and copies in movement chains are examples. Similarly, paradigm formation sometimes allows the child to recover abstract entities (cf. Pinker, 1984), so that empty heads which entertain a paradigmatic relation with overt heads can be acquired. What is ruled out, however, are heads that are empty irrespective of the context in which they appear. ™ ™ An empty head acquired through paradigm formation might exist in the English verbal domain. If English modals constitute a paradigm, an abstract auxiliary element can perhaps be motivated on the basis of this. Thus, a simple declarative sentence could be analyzed as in (i), an analysis in line with standard approaches to do-support. (i) [rp John [r e, [vp wore a purple party hat]]] 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 1 II (2001) 189-233 191 As we will show, this claim implies that the number of functional projections in a language is directly related to the number of verb movement operations it employs. Thus, we expect that only languages with a sufficient number of verb movements have a functional structure rich enough to project TECS. As Vikner (1990, 1995) observes, there is indeed a correlation between verb movement and the grammaticality of TECS: TECS only occur in languages that have both V to I movement and verb second (V2). Thus, Icelandic allows for TECS, but Danish, which has V2 but no V to I movement, does not. Similarly, Vikner™s gener- alization captures the fact that French only allows expletive constructions with unac- cusative verbs, as French has V to I movement but no V2. (3) a. *I1 a un homme mange une pomme there has a man eaten an apple b. 11 est arrive un homme there is arrived a man French Although Bobaljik and Jonas and Bobaljik and Thrainsson address the correlation between V to I movement and the grammaticality of TECS, they do not discuss the relevance of V2. Yet, as we have seen, Vikner™s generalization can easily be made compatible with the idea that underlies their analyses, namely that TECS require the availability of two specifier positions. Suppose that if the verb moves once, only one functional projection is licensed and consequently the subject and the expletive com- pete for a single specifier position. If the verb undergoes both V2 and V to I, there are two specifiers (spec-IP and spec-CP) and hence no competition arises. The reason that Bobaljik and Jonas and Bobaljik and Thrainsson cannot adopt an analysis along these lines lies in the standard assumption that subjects and expletives are licensed in specifiers in the inflectional domain (spec-TP and spec-AgrSP), but not elsewhere. The analysis just sketched, however, presupposes that expletives can licensed in spec-CP as well. This highlights the fact that in addition to the theory of functional projections, the theory that deals with the licensing of subjects and expletives must be spelled out. If this is not done, it remains unclear why (lb) would be ungrammatical under an analysis in which the expletive occupies spec-CP while the subject appears VP-inter- nally, or why (3a) would be ungrammatical with a VP-internal subject and an exple- tive in spec-IP. Moreover, if a head can take multiple specifiers, why would two functional projections be required for TECS to be grammatical? We believe that predication theory, as developed in Williams (1980, 1994, 1997), provides straightforward answers to these questions. According to this theory, there is no specific subject position and hence no specific specifier in which subjects and expletives must occur. Rather, predicates must find their subject somewhere within their m-command domain. Suppose now that expletives mark the LF position, of the subject (Chomsky, 1986, 1995). Suppose furthermore that no argument can move to a position in which it could have been base-generated (that is, where it could have received its O-role). Then, covert movement of the subject to an expletive inserted within VP™s predicational domain is prohibited. As VP™s predicational domain 192 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 1 I I (2001) 189-233 consists of the entire clause when it is dominated by a single functional projection, languages with a relatively poor functional architecture cannot project TECS. This is depicted in (4) where square brackets indicate VP™s predicational domain. (4) *h+, expletive-DP . . . tDP . . . VP] (LF) If VP is dominated by two or more functional projections, expletives can be inserted outside VP™s predicational domain. The consequence is that movement of the subject to the expletive is allowed: The subject does not move to a position in which it could have been base-generated. Hence, TECS are acceptable in languages with a richer functional architecture: (5) [Fp_2 expletive-DP . . . [Fp_, to, . . . VP]] (LF) Thus, we will argue that variation in functional structure, in interaction with predi- cation theory, explains the distribution of TECS. 2. Predication theory 2.1. Subjects as external arguments Many theories make a distinction between internal and external relations. Internal relations, such as c-selection, hold between a head and a phrase contained in its max- imal projection. External relations, on the other hand, hold between phrases. An example is anaphoric binding: we are not aware of theories in which an anaphor™s antecedent is contained in its maximal projection. Whereas c-selection and binding clearly instantiate internal and external relations, it is less obvious how predication should be characterized. One view is that it is an internal relation: Stowell (1981) argues that subjects are specifiers of predicative heads. In this paper, we adopt the alternative view, according to which predication is an external relation. As commonly assumed, a head may assign one or more O-roles to constituents within its maximal projection (cf. (6a)). Williams (1980, 1994, 1997) argues that, in addition, a maximal projection may assign a O-role to a constituent external to it. It is this external thematic relation that defines predication: The con- stituent O-marked by XP is XP™s subject (cf. (6b)). (6) a. [XP X . . . . . DPI <o,,> b. [YP DP f.... XPI <o+ Certain properties of predication follow from its characterization as an external rela- tion. First, selectional requirements imposed by the head do not affect the subject. So, although a verb may c-select an object of a particular category, the category of 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua I11 (2001) 189-233 193 the subject cannot be selected for (Marantz, 1984). Second, predication, like other external relations, is unique. The anaphor each other in (7a) must have a unique antecedent (Koster, 1987). It can be related to either the women or the men, but not to both at the same time. Similarly, the secondary predicate drunk in (7b) must have a unique subject, either the women and the men, but not both. (7) a. The women introduced the men to each other b. The women met the men drunk Third, just like an anaphor must find its antecedent in a c-commanding position, a predicate must be c-commanded by its subject (Williams, 1980). The examples in (8) are ungrammatical for the same reason. (8) a. ﬁ[JOhni™S brother] showed Bill to himselfi b. *[JOhni™s brother] met Mary nude, Predication is not only an external relation, but also a relation involving O-role assignment. This has consequences for the domain in which it can take place. Fol- lowing common practice, we assume that O-role assignment is phrase-bound. This implies that a head can only assign O-roles to constituents contained within it max- imal projection (as already noted). Similarly, a maximal projection must m-com- mand the constituent it takes for subject. As predication theory is instrumental in explaining the distribution of expletives, let us consider where we may find the subject of VP. We propose that in principle two positions are available. The subject may appear in the specifier position of the first functional projection dominating VP (cf. 9a), or it may be base-generated as an adjunct to VP (cf. 9b).2 (9) a. [Fp DP F [vp . . . V . ..]I b. [,,r DP [vr . . . V . ..]I The structure in (9a) does not require much discussion. The subject c-commands VP and it appears within VP™s m-command domain. Hence, the structural conditions on predication are met. The structure in (9b) also meets these conditions, but only if a particular view of structural command is adopted. Chomsky (1986: 8-9) argues that command should be defined in terms of categories rather than segments. Thus the following definitions of c-command and m-command obtain: 2 We abstract away from the internal structure of VP. It may be that what we call VP consists of the projection of a light verb, v, in addition to the more traditional VP (Chomsky, 1995). It may even be that VP and VP are separated by functional projections accommodating auxiliaries, object shift and scram- bling (Collins and Thrainsson, 1996). In theories employing a light verb, the external O-role originates in v rather than V. This implies that, given the theory of predication adopted here, the subject can either appear adjoined to VP or occupy the specifier of the first functional projection dominating VP. Similar remarks can be made with respect to projections of auxiliaries and copulas; these, too, would have to be part of the predicate. 194 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 (10) a. A category CY c-commands a category p if and only if (i) a does not domi- nate p, and (ii) there is no category that dominates o but does not dominate P. b. A category c1 m-commands a category I3 if and only if (i) a does not domi- nate, and (ii) there is no maximal category that dominates but does not dom- inate p. Crucially, DP in (9b) is not dominated by the category VP, although it is dominated by one of its segments. This implies that according to the definitions in (10) DP c- commands VP and is contained within VP™s m-command domain. (9b) consequently qualifies as a configuration that allows predication, a conclusion which echoes claims made in Manzini (1983) and Koopman and Sportiche (1991). In fact, (9b) is not the only adjunction structure allowing predication. If multiple elements are adjoined to VP, these can either precede or follow the subject without destroying the configuration essential to predication. In both (1 la) and (11 b), the subject c-commands VP while VP m-commands the subject. (11) a. hp XP [VP DP [VP ... v ..-I11 b. [VP DP [VP XI™ [VP . . . v . ..I11 The implication is that subjects which precede adverbs are not necessarily in the specifier position of a functional projection. They may still occupy a VP-adjoined position.ﬂ Although predication theory allows (9a,b) and (1 la,b), it also excludes certain structures. First, on the definition of m-command adopted in (lo), subjects cannot be generated in a functional projection that does not immediately dominate VP. Although DP c-commands VP in (12), it does not appear within VP™s predicational domain. Hence the structure is ruled out. (12) *[rr-2 DP F-2 [FP_, F-l [VP . . . v ..-I11 Second, although the subject can be realized in more than one position, it is not pos- sible to generate more than one subject. As said, the unicity of external relations extends to predication, and hence if there is one predicate (in this case VP), only one subject position can be realized. A structure like (13), in which both DPs are sub- jects, is ruled out. (13) *[FP DP F [VP DP [VP . . . v . ..I11 In sum, VP takes a single subject within its m-command domain. 3 If structural command of adjoined categories by the category they are adjoined to is to be avoided, as Kayne (1994) argues, the locality condition on predication must be changed slightly. Instead of requir- ing m-command by the predicate, one would have to say that no maximal category may dominate the predicate that does not also dominate the subject. 0. Kaeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 195 2.2. Raising to subject In a minimalist theory of syntax, O-theory must be located at the LF interface: It is a theory about the mapping of syntactic positions to semantic functions. Thus far, we have represented these functions as O-roles, but we believe that this notation is just a convenient shorthand. In fact, an n-place predicate P should be represented as in (14), where every combination of a lambda operator and the variable it binds cor- responds to a thematic function. Saturation of a O-role can be seen as the application of the formula in (14) to an argument.4 (14) hx, . . . hx, [P (x, . . . x,)] In most cases, it is harmless to represent ‚hx . . . x™ as a O-role. The formula in (15), for example, is the semantic representation of a verb taking two objects, but no prob- lems are caused by saying that this verb assigns two internal O-roles. (15) hY AZ [V (Y z)l As we proceed, however, we will see that representing the semantic properties of predicates by O-roles obscures a generalization concerning base-generated and derived subjects, namely that both are related to VP by predication. Given the above, a VP assigning an external O-role should be represented as in (16). (16) hx [vp . . . (x) . . . ] Although discharged by maximal projections, external thematic functions should be encoded in the lexical entry of the head, if only to explain why not all heads project them. The question is how this can be achieved, especially in view of the fact that external O-roles cannot be assigned by the verb. What we propose is that the exter- nal thematic function of a verb is lexically represented as a variable, rather than as a variable bound by a lambda operator. Thus, the variable x in (17) lexically represents V™s external thematic function. Since V™s lexical entry does not provide a lambda operator for it, x cannot be used to license an internal argument. (17) hY AZ IV 6 Y -@I Of course, if x is to represent an external thematic function, a lambda operator for it must be introduced at some point. We propose that VP (and perhaps other predica- tive categories) inherently introduces a lambda operator at the level of semantic 4 The fact that thematic functions involve lambda operators does not imply that every lambda operator can be used to motivate an A-position. What we assume is that variables motivating thematic functions have specific restrictions, such as THEME or GOAL. Thus, in the lexical representation of the verb like paint the internal O-role is represented as x [THEME (x)]. We abstract away from this in the main text. 196 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman /Lingua I11 (2001) 189-233 interpretation (Partee, 1973; Williams, 1977). After discharge of its internal thematic functions, the verb in (17) will therefore project a category of the required type (cf. 16). In other words, the difference between an internal and external O-role concerns the level at which the relevant lambda operator is introduced, namely at the level of V and VP respectively.5 The theory developed thus far suggests a particular formulation of the EPP, the requirement that every clause have a subject. If VP inherently introduces a lambda operator, this category must always function as a predicate, and consequently there must always be subject that satisfies its thematic function. This implies that the EPP and the rule that introduces a lambda operator at the VP level can be analyzed as one and the same: ( 18) Extended Projection Principle Map the syntactic category VP onto hx [IVPI] It is commonly assumed that the EPP is responsible for NP raising in passive and unaccusative contexts. At first sight, this seems at odds with the view of subjects adopted here. If passive and unaccusative verbs assign their O-roles internally (to their complements), how can a derived subject be related to VP by predication? And if a derived subject is not related to VP by predication, how can the principle in (18) trigger NP raising? These problems disappear once it is recognized that O-roles are epiphenomenal in nature. If O-roles were primitive grammatical notions, the assignment of a O-role to object position would imply that the thematic function it represents will never be available elsewhere in the structure. However, we have already argued that O-roles are convenient shorthand for the combination of a lambda operator and an associated variable. This makes it possible to say that, at least from the perspective of predica- tion theory, a VP with an unsaturated thematic function is equivalent to a VP con- taining the trace of NP movement. Both contain a ‚gap™ that makes it possible for VP to function as a predicate. More specifically, we propose that traces of NP movement, like other traces, are interpreted as variables. This means that the syntactic structure in (19a) will give rise to a semantic representation in which the verb™s internal thematic function is satis- fied by a variable. The resulting (partial) formula is given in (19b), which reduces to (19~) after lambda conversion. We further propose that in the structure at hand the lambda operator introduced by VP binds the variable introduced by the trace. We thus follow Kitagawa (1989) and Chierchia (1995) in assuming that the syntactic structure in (19a) is ultimately mapped onto the semantic representation in (19d). There are various ways in which the theory that VP introduces a lambda operator can be developed. One option would be to say that what we call VP is in fact the projection of a light verb v (see note 2). If so, the lambda operator would be introduced by v and bind a variable contained in VP. This would bring our proposal closer to recent analyses of subjects, such as the one in Kratzer (1996). Kratzer argues that the external argument is not assigned by VP but introduced by a functional head, here v. It would take us too far afieid to address the issue in detail. 0. Koeneman. A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 197 (19) a. [vp V 4 b. LY [V (~11 x c. v (x) d. hx [V (x)] As is turns out, then, the semantic representations of a VP containing the trace of NP movement and a VP with an unassigned external O-role (cf. (16)) are identical. This suggests that derived subjects, like base-generated subjects, are thematically related to VP. The only difference between the two lies in the origin of the thematic func- tion they satisfy (Williams, 1994; Neeleman and Weerman, 1999). The impression that derived subjects occupy a non-thematic position only arises if a predicate™s argument-taking properties are represented as O-roles.‚j If the semantics of NP raising is as suggested, the operation can indeed be trig- gered by the version of the EPP assumed here. A VP projected from a passive or unaccusative verb can only be interpreted as a predicate if the object is promoted to subject, and a structure like (19a) is created. If no such movement takes place, there is no variable to be bound by VP™s lambda operator and hence the resulting structure is uninterpretable. Thus, NP raising is an operation through which passive and unac- cusative VPs can meet the extended projection principle.7 Of course, the question remains whether an LF condition like (18) can trigger overt movement. We postpone discussion of why NP raising is overt in certain constructions until Section 6. Although we assume that traces of NP movement are interpreted as variables, this does not mean that NP movement should pattern with A™-movement in all respects. Crucially, the variable introduced by NP trace is bound by a lambda operator at LF (see section 6 for more discussion). Traces of A™-movement, on the other hand, form a syntactic chain with the operator that binds them. A™-movement is hence expected to license parasitic gaps and give rise to crossover effects, but NP movement is not 6 The analysis can be extended to cases of subject to subject raising. Consider (i). (i) John seems [I to have read this book] The lexical representation of the verb seem is as in (iia). This verb takes a clause as its internal argument, which results in (iic) after lambda conversion. The embedded clause contains a trace (that is, a variable) which the lambda operator introduced by the matrix VP binds. Hence, the matrix VP can function as a predicate (cf. iid). (ii) a. Ly [seems (y)] b. hy [seems (y)] [x to have read this book] c. [seems [x to have read this book]] d. 1.x [vp seems [x to have read this book]] Alternatively, seem is analyzed as a functor instead of a predicate (Williams, 1994). an option we can- not discuss here. ™ Given this analysis the O-criterion should be formulated in terms of restrictions like THEME or GOAL. As argued in note 4, such restrictions determine the interpretation of thematic variables. Suppose that no argument (chain) may be associated with two such restrictions. Then, the contrast between regular NP raising and raising to a O-position follows. Even if in examples like John arrived t the raised DP and its trace form a chain (something we will ultimately deny), this chain is associated with a single thematic restriction. In examples like John killed t, however, either the chain ‚John, t™ is associated with two the- matic restrictions (if NP raising involves chain formation), or John is (if it does not). 198 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 (on the assumption that these phenomena are sensitive to the presence of a syntactic operator). Thus, the proposed analysis of NP movement does not affect generaliza- tions familiar from the literature. For ease of presentation, we continue to use O-roles as a notational device in what follows, unless it is critical not to. 2.3. Unmotivated movement We have just argued that predication theory drives NP raising. We will now argue that it is also crucial in ruling out certain movements as unmotivated. It is uncontro- versial that every movement must have a trigger. This requirement entails that the head of a movement chain (a, ta} must be licensed by at least one function, F, which cannot be satisfied by the tail of the chain (cf. (20)). In the absence of such a func- tion, o™s derived position counts as unmotivated. (20) a . . . t, F If this is the defining property of triggers, one would expect a further requirement to hold as well: Something must motivate the presence of the trace. Like the head, the tail of a movement chain must be licensed by at least one function, F™, which cannot be satisfied by its head (cf. (21)). In the absence of such a function, the trace counts as unmotivated. (21) o. . . . t, F F™ Consider which functions may license the presence of a trace. We will not attempt to give an exhaustive answer to this question, but it seems that on standard assumptions F™ in (21) is typically interpretive, in that it allows the chain to pass full interpreta- tion. Our claim, then, is that this interpretive function must differ from whatever (interpretive or syntactic) functions can be realized by the head of the chain. In the context of this paper we are mainly interested in movements that affect arguments. For such movements, the literature suggests a particular characterization of F™. As Chomsky (1981) notes, it is a pervasive property of chains containing an argument position that this position constitutes the foot of the chain. Conversely, we may say that the foot of such chains is licensed if and only it is O-marked. From our present perspective, the foot of such chains is only motivated if assigned a O-role which could not have been assigned to the head.8 When an object undergoes WH movement, for example, its trace is licensed because spec-CP is well beyond the domain in which the verb can assign its thematic roles. * The foot of a chain could of course have additional functions. It could, for example, mark a scope that is different from that of the head of the chain. The question, however, is whether these additional func- tions are enough to motivate the presence of a trace. As expressed by Chomsky™s (1981) chain condition, there are no argument chains in which the chain root is not a thematic position. 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 1 II (2001) 189-233 199 Things are rather different when we turn to movement of the subject within VP™s predicational domain. We have already argued that the subject can be generated in either a VP-adjoined position or in the specifier of the first projection dominating VP. This implies that a structure like (22), in which the subject moves from one of these positions to the other, violates the ban on unmotivated movement. The O-role assigned to the foot of the chain in (22) could also have been assigned to its head, and hence the presence of the trace is not sufficiently motivated. (22) *[IT DP F [VP tDP [VP . . . v . . .I]] Although movement from the VP-adjoined subject position to the specifier of the first projection dominating VP counts as unmotivated, movement to or from either of these positions is not excluded across the board. For a start, both subject positions may function as a landing site for NP movement. In the representations in (23), the trace in object position is licensed, as it is O-marked by the verb. The verb cannot assign its internal O-role to the position in which the object has landed, as this posi- tion lie outside its m-command domain. (23) a. [vp DP [vp . . . V top . ..I b. [FPDPF[vP . . . V tDP --*II Furthermore, both subject positions may function as the foot of a movement chain, as long as the movement in question targets a landing site outside VP™s predicational domain. The representations in (24), for example, are well formed because DP has moved to the specifier of the second projection dominating VP. This specifier is not m-commanded by VP and hence the O-role that licenses the foot of the movement chain could not have been assigned to it. As a result, the presence of a trace in sub- ject position is sufficiently motivated. (24) a. lFp_* DP F-2 [up_i F-l [VP tDP [VP , . . V . . .1111 b. [Fp_2 DP F-2 [Fp_I top F-l [VP . . . v . ..I]] In sum, the ban on unmotivated movement, in conjunction with predication theory, blocks movement of the subject within the VP™s predicational domain, but not move- ment to this domain or movement from it. From this, the distribution of TECS can be derived, as we will now argue. 3. The syntax of expletives 3.1. Expletives and movement Expletives cannot function as arguments by themselves, a fact illustrated by the ill-formedness of *there arrived. Rather, they must have an associate, as in there arrived three men, and this associate must occupy a position within ‚moving 200 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua III (2001) 189-233 distance™ from the expletive.9 One interpretation of this state of affairs is that the associate moves and adjoins to the expletive at LF. Thus, a sentence like (25a) is assigned the LF in (25b) (Chomsky, 1986, 1995; see Moro, 1997; Hoekstra and Mulder, 1990 for an alternative analysis). (25) a. There have arrived three men b. [[There] three men] have arrived ? (overt syntax) (LF) Evidence for a covert movement comes from the fact that the associate behaves as a subject with respect to control. As pointed out by Chomsky (1995), there is a con- trast between (26a) and (26b): (26) a. *The inspector arrested three men without PRO identifying themselves b. There arrived three men without PRO identifying themselves Movement to the expletive, as in (25b), satisfies the EPP as formulated in Section 2. The condition that VP be mapped into a predicate at LF is met in exactly the same way as in other cases of NP raising: The trace in object position is interpreted as a variable bound by VP™s lambda operator. Thus, a configuration results that allows VP to take a subject. As in other raising constructions, it is the raised DP that will function as such. (Although this DP is adjoined to the expletive, it c-commands VP according to the definition of c-command adopted in Section 2.1.) On this analysis, expletives mark the LF position of the subject. This does not imply that an expletive must itself occupy the thematic subject position. Since argu- ments are commonly seen as (possibly one-membered) chains, marking the position of the subject means marking the head of the chain which is assigned VP™s thematic function. This leaves open the possibility that the expletive appears in the thematic subject position. Alternatively it may occupy a position higher in the tree, most notably spec-CP. In that case, the associate must pass through the subject position at some stage of the derivation. English expletive constructions instantiate the first option; the second, we will argue, obtains in Icelandic and Yiddish TECS (Thrains- son, 1979; SigurBsson, 1989; Holmberg, 1995). If the associate moves to the expletive, the ban on unmotivated movement explains which constructions may host expletives. As argued in Section 2.3, this constraint blocks movement of the subject to a position within VP™s predicational domain. The complementary distribution of expletives and base-generated or raised subjects in English, illustrated in (27) is a consequence of this. (27) a. *[ir There have [vr three men [vp eaten an apple]]] b. *[,r There have [vr three men [vr arrived t]]] (overt syntax) (overt syntax) 9 Some languages allow expletive insertion in the absence of an associate, in particular in impersonal passives. This does not mean, however, that the expletive functions as an argument: it cannot be assigned a thematic role, for example. We cannot discuss impersonal constructions here, but see Ackema and Neeleman (1998) for an analysis that shares the basic premises of this paper. 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman / Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 201 First, consider the construction in (27a), which is mapped onto the LF representation in (28) by movement of the subject to the expletive. Crucially, this movement counts as unmotivated, because the O-role assigned to the subject™s trace could equally well have been assigned to the position marked by the expletive. After all, this position also appears within VP™s m-command domain. Consequently, the presence of a DP in the VP-adjoined subject position blocks expletive insertion within VP™s predica- tional domain; the TEC in (27a)/(28) instantiates the ungrammatical structure in (22).‚0 (28) *[Ip [There [three men]] have [vp t [vp eaten an apple]]] (LF) Next, consider the construction in (27b), in which an object has raised to the VP- adjoined subject position (cf. 9b) while an expletive is inserted in the first functional shell dominating VP. As before, the DP argument is adjoined to there at LF. This gives rise to the representation in (29). Since movement of the VP-adjoined DP to the expletive takes place within the m-command domain of VP, it counts as unmoti- vated. The O-role assigned to the (intermediate) trace could also have been assigned to the position marked by the expletive. Like (28), (29) instantiates the ungrammat- ical structure in (22).ﬂ (29) *[Ip [There [three men]] have [vp t [vp arrived t]]] (LF) To summarize, the presence of an expletive in the m-command domain of the predicate has as a consequence that overt NP raising to a lower subject position is lo On the basis of examples like (i), Chomsky (1995) suggests that English does have TECS. If enter is analyzed as a transitive verb, this example contains both an expletive and an extraposed subject (namely a tall dark stranger). (i) There entered the room a tall dark stranger We do not believe that this conclusion is correct. Instead, we suggest that a taN dark stranger is the internal argument of an unaccusative complex predicate enter the room. On this analysis, the example at hand patterns with there arrived a tall dark stranger. There are two arguments that support the suggested analysis. First, the expression corresponding to enter the room in Dutch takes BE rather than HAVE as an auxiliary in the perfect (cf. iia). Second, enter the room can be combined with a nominal secondary predicate (cf. iib), and this respect it patterns with unaccusatives rather than transitives (cf. iib™,bﬂ). (ii) a. Hij is de kamer binnengekomen Dutch he is the room entered b. He entered the room a happy man b™. He died a happy man bﬂ. *He ate his steak a happy man ﬂ The explanation offered excludes raising NP into the predicational domain that also contains the expletive. On the assumption that in passive constructions the relevant predicate includes the verb be (see note 2), the ungrammatical@ of (ia) has the same source as that of (27). The analysis does not exclude raising operations internal to the predicate. Hence, even if (ib) involves raising of someone from the object position of arrested, it is not ruled out. (i) a. *There has someone [been tDP arrested] b. There has [been someone arrested] 202 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 blocked, as is base generation of a subject in that position. The only remaining pos- sibility is that the associate of the expletive is located in VP rather than in VP™s m- command domain. If it then raises to the position marked by the expletive, a struc- ture results that instantiates (23a) or (23b). As in this case the trace is O- marked by the verb, its presence is sufficiently motivated. The grammaticality of unaccusative expletive constructions like in (25) is thus accounted for. Before we proceed, we should point out that Den D&ken (1995) and others have raised doubts about the existence of associate-to-expletive raising. The problem is that this operation neither changes scope nor feeds binding. We do not find the argu- ment based on binding convincing, since LF movement in general does not seem to give rise to new binding possibilities. The argument based on scope is stronger and the data require an alternative explanation. We assume that in the case of NP raising scope may in principle be marked either before or after movement (Ruys, 1992). We further assume that, as a discourse constraint, the usage of extra material in a sen- tence (extra effort on behalf of the speaker) is considered by the hearer to be mark- ing a specific interpretation (Sperber and Wilson, 1986). Therefore, if a speaker includes an expletive in the numeration and thus uses a structure in which the sub- ject surfaces in its base position, (s)he signals to the hearer that the subject is to be given narrow scope. 3.2. Expletives and functional projection Suppose that in some language VP is dominated by a second functional projection that allows expletive insertion. Then, an expletive could be generated outside VP™s predicational domain. This implies that even if the associate is a subject, the trace left behind by LF raising will not violate the ban on unmotivated movement. TECS are hence ruled in. Consider the structure in (30). In this structure the subject is inserted in the spec- ifier of FP- 1, while an expletive appears in the specifier of FP-2. (30) [Fp_2 expletive F-2 [Fp_I DP F-l [vp . . . V . ..I11 Movement of the subject to the expletive yields the LF representation in (31). (31) [m_2 expletive-DP F-2 [Fp_I toP F-l [vr . . . V . ..]]I Note that this structure does not violate the ban on unmotivated movement. As VP cannot assign its O-role outside its m-command domain, the function of subject can only be fulfilled by the trace (whose presence is thereby sufficiently motivated). In other words, (31) instantiates the structure in (24b). Structures like (30) are not available in English, as in this language VP is domi- nated by at most one functional projection that allows for expletive insertion. The distribution of modals shows that in addition to V there is a second verbal head posi- tion (usually labelled ‚I™). Of course, the set of verbal projections is extended beyond IP in WH questions and negative inversion, but in these constructions the extra 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman / Lingua Ill (2001) 189-233 203 specifier position is filled by a WH expression or a negative operator, leaving no room for expletive insertion. Hence, expletives will always appear within VP™s m- command domain in English, with the consequence that including a subject in this domain as well leads to an unmotivated movement. So, languages in which TECS are grammatical should have a richer functional structure than English: VP should be dominated by at least two functional projec- tions, the second of which allows for expletive insertion. As spelled out in the intro- duction, we assume that each functional shell must be headed by a (trace of an) overt head prior to spell out (Grimshaw, 1995). To be more precise, an extra projection on top of VP can be generated in two ways. Either an overt functional head (for instance, a complementizer or modal) is taken from the lexicon and merged with VP, or the tree is extended by head movement. This second case is crucial for most cases discussed below. It is usually asserted that if an element is attached to a node 13 by movement, it is l3 that projects. However, we can see no valid independent reason for ruling out pro- jection of , at least not for ruling it out across the board. We propose instead that a head which is merged with VP in order to create a functional projection need not be taken from the lexicon - it may also be a moved verb. In other words, the tree can be extended by attaching the verb to the top of its own projection line and having it project again. Thus, a second projection is generated on top of the original VP (Ack- ema et al., 1993; Koeneman, 1997): (32) [VP . . . b V [VP . . . [v, tv . . . 1111 Although novel in some of its technical details, this view of functional structure ties in with a traditional insight, namely that verb movement can either take the form of adjunction or of substitution. Adjunction obtains when the verb is moved to a head that is merged with VP independently. A structure identical to one derived by sub- stitution results from the moved verb being merged with VP directly. In fact, the pro- cedure that derives (32) improves on traditional analyses of substitution, as it expresses the outcome of this operation without assuming that some abstract head is replaced or overwritten by the verb after movement. If functional projections hosting verb movement are generated as indicated, tradi- tional labels can no longer be used. A structure in which the verb undergoes V to I and V2 is usually represented as in (33a). On the account proposed here, (33b) is the correct representation. For ease of exposition we will use labels like CP and IP where this is not crucial, but no theoretical status should be attached to this. The properties of functional VPs should not follow from their label, but rather from their function in the clause. We will not discuss the function of V2 in this paper (but see Koeneman (2000) for a proposal). For V to I an explicit proposal is made in section 5 (strictly speaking V to I has now become a misnomer; we will maintain it as a descriptive term, though.) (33) a. [cr . . . [c™ [c 1, v II Cl LIP *** [I™ t1 [VP v-0 Iv™ tv *** 111111 b. [vr . . . [VP V [VP . . . Iv™ tv [VP . . . [v™ tv . . . 111111 204 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 Some well-known assumptions guarantee that functional VPs have the properties they should have. Suppose that, in principle, any sequence of (near-)identical nodes ending in a terminal can be construed as a projection line.‚* Consequently, the node dominating the moved verb in (32) can either be taken as a projection of the moved verb or as an extension of the lower VP. This undesirable ambiguity is resolved by chain uniformity, which requires that chain members are identical (Chomsky 1995: 91). If the lower VP is extended, the moved verb will be interpreted as [+maximal]: It is the highest node in a one-membered projection line. Hence, it cannot form a chain with its [-maximal] trace. If the moved verb projects, however, it will be inter- preted as [-maximal] and hence chain formation is possible. The top VP in (32) must consequently be a projection of the moved verb. A second property of (32) is that the topmost verbal projection is truly functional: Its head cannot assign any thematic roles. Again, no new assumptions need to be made, as in any theory O-role assignment must be restricted to chain roots. In GB theory this restriction follows from D-structure O-role assignment. A minimalist alternative has been developed by Brody (1998). Brody argues that properties of a predicate change when its thematic functions are discharged (or when its thematic functions percolate up the tree). This implies that, in violation of a strict interpreta- tion of chain uniformity, a verb would no longer be an exact copy of its trace if it assigns a O-role after movement. If the O-role is assigned prior to movement, how- ever, this problem does not arise: It is marked as discharged in both the moved pred- icate and its trace. Interestingly, both the GB account and Brody™s minimalist analy- sis allow projection of categorical features after movement, at least in principle. This is exactly what we need to allow the structure in (32). The proposed theory predicts that there is a correlation between head movement and the availability of functional structure. It will be clear that if no verb movement takes place, no functional projection is present either (modulo functional projections derived through direct insertion). Given that two projections are necessary for a TEC to be well formed, TECS should only occur if verb movement and insertion of func- tional heads create a sufficiently large structure. As we will see in the next section, Vikner™s generalization follows from this. 4. Explaining Vikner™s generalization 4.1. Basic contrasts Let us start by considering the functional structure of languages other than Eng- lish. With the exception of English, all Germanic languages have V2. The finite verb always occurs in second position; if another element than the subject is topicalized, subject-verb inversion is obligatory. This basic fact is illustrated by the examples in (34). ‚* Nodes in a projection are completely identical if no bar levels are assumed (Chomsky, 1995: Chap- ter 4). Otherwise nodes in a projection line differ only in bar level. 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 11 I (2001) 189-233 205 (34) a. [cp Bokina keypti [J6n ekki]] the-book bought John not Icelandic b. [cp DOS bukh shik [ikh avek]] the book send I away c. [Cp Boken kijpte [Ulf inte]] the-book bought Ulf not Yiddish Swedish d. [cr Denne film har [bomene set]] this film have the children seen Danish V2 is analyzed as the result of two movement operations. The first fronts the verb and thus creates a functional projection; the second places some XP in sentence-ini- tial position, presumably in the specifier of the projection headed by the moved verb. These sentences therefore provide evidence for the existence of at least one func- tional projection on top of VP. There is a typological split between Icelandic and Yiddish on the one hand, and Mainland Scandinavian on the other. It can be shown that the first two have a sec- ond verb movement operation, usually referred to as V to I. This operation is absent in Mainland Scandinavian, as can be directly observed in embedded clauses, where no V2 occurs. Here the finite verb follows adverbials that mark the left edge of VP, suggesting that it does not leave its base position. (35) a. [cp at [vp Peter rvp ofte ivp hawk lost dd111 that Peter often had read it Danish b. h-r att [,,r Jan ivp ofta Lvp kysser M~allll that Jan often kisses Maria Swedish Recall that the theory developed in Section 2 allows predication in multiple adjunc- tion structures such as those in (35). The mere fact that the subject precedes an adverb does not imply that it occupies the specifier position of a functional head. In Icelandic and Yiddish, V2 also occurs in embedded contexts: The finite verb immediately follows a topicalized constituent, as shown in (36). (We label the embedded V2 projection as CP.)13 (36) a. [cp aB [cp i herberginu hefur [kyrin stabiG]]] that in the room has the cow stood Icelandic b. [cp az [,-r morgn vet [dos yingl zen a kats]]] that tomorrow will the boy see a cat Yiddish This makes it hard to show that V to I exists in these languages. However, there are certain constructions in both Icelandic and Yiddish in which embedded V2 is I3 Iatridou and Kroch (1992) and Vikner (1994) argue for an analysis of embedded V2 in terms of CP recursion. In other analyses (Rbgnvaldsson and ThrBinsson, 1990; Diesing, 1990). the topicalized phrase occupies spec-IP, while the verb moves to I. The analysis of V to I presented in Section 5 rules out such an account, as it predicts that spec-IP must be associated with VP™s subject function. 206 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 excluded. As Vikner (1995) shows, CPs introduced by the WH elements af hverju ‚why™ or hvenazr ‚when™ in Icelandic (37a,a™) cannot be followed by an element other than the (37) a. a™. b. b™. subject. A similar effect occurs with ven ‚when™ in Yiddish (37b,b™). *fig veit ekki [cp af hverju [cp I herberginu hefur [kyrin staai6]]] Icelandic I know not why in the room has the cow stood fig veit ekki [cp af hverju [kyrin hefur (oft) stabi i herberginu]] I know not why the cow has stood in the room %Ikh veys nit [cp ven [cp in tsimer iz [di ku geshtanen]]]r4 Yiddish I know not when in the room has the cow stood Ikh veys nit [cp ven [di ku iz (oyfn) geshtanen in tsimer]] I know not when the cow has stood in the room Given that these WH elements block V2 for some reason, they provide us with a means of testing whether V to I takes place. If it does, we expect the finite verb to precede VP adverbials, in contrast to what could be observed in Mainland Scandina- vian. As can be observed in (37a™) and (37b™), this is indeed what we find if an adverbial is inserted. So, in addition to V2, Icelandic and Yiddish have a second verb movement and therefore an additional functional projection between VP and what is usually called CP. Whereas Mainland Scandinavian has one functional projection on top of VP (say CP), Icelandic and Yiddish have two (say CP and IP). We now predict that TECS are available in Icelandic and Yiddish but not in the Mainland Scandinavian lan- guages. (38) a. b. C. d. This prediction is borne out by the examples be10w.r~ [cr. pa6 hafa [rp margir jolasveinar [,,r bor6aa bubing]]] there have many Santa Clauses eaten pudding [cP Es hot [rp imitser [vp gegesn an epl]]] there has someone eaten an apple *[cP Det har [vp nagon [vp &it ett apple]]] there has someone eaten an apple *[,-P Der har [vp nogen [vr spist et ceble]]] there has someone eaten an apple Icelandic Yiddish Swedish Danish The ungrammaticality of (38c,d) originates in the fact that VP™s predicational domain consists of the entire clause. Hence, raising of the subject to the expletive will leave an unmotivated trace. In the grammatical representations in (38a,b), on the other hand, VP™s predicational domain includes IP but not CP, so that the I4 The class of WH expression that block embedded V2 is larger in Icelandic than it is in Yiddish. A reviewer remarks, for example, that a large group of speakers accept (37b). This means that for those speakers we cannot use this test as a diagnostic for independent V to I. Is The specifier of a complementizer like that tolerates only a limited set of elements, namely syntac- tic operators and their traces. Whatever is responsible for this restriction also precludes insertion of expletives in the specifier position of a complementizer. 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 207 trace left behind by raising to the expletive is motivated by the O-role it receives from VP. The claim that expletives cannot but appear in VP™s predicational domain in Mainland Scandinavian, in contrast to Icelandic and Yiddish, makes a further pre- diction. Overt raising in unaccusative and passive structures create configurations comparable to those in (38). The only difference is that the subject is a raised cate- gory and the object a trace. Therefore, even if an expletive is inserted, overt NP rais- ing should be possible in Icelandic and Yiddish. In Mainland Scandinavian, on the other hand, such raising is excluded. The associate cannot move to a position other than that marked by the expletive. If it raises to the VP-adjoined subject position in overt syntax, subsequent LF movement to the expletive will leave an unmotivated trace. The data are as expected: I6 (39) a. b. C. 
d. [cp Paij hafa [Ip cmargir menn> [vp komib <margir menn> there have many men come many men hingaP, i dag]]] here today Icelandic [cP Es vert [Ip <an epl> [vp gegesn <an epl>]]] there was an apple eaten an apple Yiddish [CP Det har [vp <*mAnga m%n> [vp kommit <mAnga m&in> hit idag]]] there has many men come many men here today Swedish [cp Der blev [vp <*et oeble> [vp spist <et ozble>]]] Danish there was eaten an apple We should point out that our analysis does not yet capture the optionality of rais- ing in Icelandic and Yiddish. However, if we assume for the moment that NP rais- ing is optional in general, the contrast between those languages and Mainland Scandinavian is derived straightforwardly. We will come back to this issue in sec- tion 6. I6 It is correctly predicted that unergatives do not allow expletive insertion in Mainland Scandinavian. This illustrated by the Danish example below: (i) *Der snakker mange folketingsmaend med joumalister hver dag Danish there talk many congressmen with journalists every day Interestingly, at least Swedish and Danish allow the single (agentive) argument of certain unergatives to be realized in object position, a fact noted by Maling (1988) for Swedish and Vikner (1995) for Danish. This possibility will only have an overt reflex if an expletive is present. Otherwise the subject position has to be filled in overt syntax (see Section 6 for discussion): (ii) at der har danset nogen i haven Danish that there has danced someone in garden At this point, it is unclear to us which principles of O-theory allow for the realization of unergative sub- jects in object position. It also unclear to which extent the phenomenon occurs in other languages. How- ever, the crucial prediction of our theory is that VP-external realization of the subject and expletive insertion cannot be combined. This is indeed the case; there is a sharp contrast between (ii) and (iii) in Danish. (iii) *at der nogen har danset i haven Danish that there someone has danced in garden 208 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 On the basis of the data presented so far, one may conclude that the presence of an IP is a sufficient condition for having TECS. But there is at least two languages, namely English and French, which show that this hypothesis is incorrect. As we have seen, English lacks verb second in declarative clauses but has an IP created through insertion of modals, etc.17 Nevertheless, English lacks TECS. Example (40a) shows that French lacks V2. Example (40b) shows that the finite verb must precede VP adverbials, indicating that it has moved from its base position. (40) a. *[cr Souvent embrasse [ip Jean t [vp t Marie]]] French often kisses John Mary b. [ip Jean embrasse [vp souvent t Marie]] John kisses often Mary Therefore, we have evidence for a single functional projection, IP, which allows expletive insertion. Our theory now correctly predicts that TECS are ungrammatical in French (41a). As expected, unaccusative expletive constructions are grammatical in French as long as the associate does not move to VP-adjoined subject position (41b). (41) a. *[,r 11 a [vp un homme [vr mange une pornme]]] there has a man eaten an apple b. [ip 11 est [vr <*un homme> [vr arrive cun hornme>]] there has a man arrived a man French In sum, French shows that it cannot be the presence of IP that licenses TECS (the same point can be made on the basis of English). It cannot be the presence of CP either because of the Mainland Scandinavian languages. Only if both projections are present is it possible to generate TECS. This follows straightforwardly from our analysis, which does not refer to any particular piece of structure but rather to the overall architecture of the functional domain: At least two projections are required. 4.2. Extensions Faroese corroborates our analysis in an interesting way. This language has V2 in main clauses only: It is an asymmetric V2 language, as (42) shows. (42) a. [cr I morgin fer [Maria tialiga 6 fotur]] Tomorrow will Mary get-up early Faroese I7 An anonymous reviewer raises the question whether an IP is present in the absence of a modal. One option would be to say that in simple declaratives IP is indeed absent, a conclusion reached earlier by Grimshaw (1995). An alternative is suggested in note 1: The logic of paradigm formation may give rise to an empty auxiliary element, which heads IP in examples like (i). The issue is orthogonal to the dis- cussion. (i) [rr John [r. e, [,,r wore a purple party hat]]] 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 209 b. *Jon ivast i [cr urn cp i morgin fer [Maria tibliga a fotur]]] John doubts on that tomorrow will Mary get-up early Jonas (1995) argues that within Faroese there is a split between a dialect that has V to I and a dialect that does not. This can be observed in embedded clauses, where, as said, V2 fails to apply. In one dialect, the finite verb precedes VP adverbials, while in the other it follows them. Of these two dialects, usually referred to as Faroese I and Faroese II, only the former seems to have two functional projections on top of VP: (43) a. b. Taa var ovaentab [cp at [,r dreingimir v&u [vr als ikki osamdir]]] Faroese I it was unexpected that boys-the were at-all not disagreed Tap var ovrentap [cp at [vr dreingimir [,,r als ikki v&u osamdir]]] Faroese II it was unexpected that boys-the at-all not were disagreed It is hence predicted that only Faroese I has TECS. According to Jonas (1995) and Bobaljik and Jonas (1996), this is correct: Only speakers that accept (43a) accept TECs.ﬂ (44) a. [cp Taa bygdu [ip nakrir islendingar [VP t h6s i Havn]]] there built some Icelanders houses in Torshavn b. *[cp Tab bygdu [vp nakrir islendingar [vr t h6s i Havn]]] there built some Icelanders houses in Torshavn Faroese I Faroese II The languages discussed so far are VO languages. If the direction of V to I is sensi- tive to the OViVO parameter, as is often assumed, V to I will usually be string-vac- uous in OV languages. This makes it difficult to check whether the verb moves or not. Nevertheless, contrasts between German and Afrikaans shows that our analysis can be extended to OV languages. German has V2 but not in clauses introduced by a complementizer: (45) a. [cr Dieses Buch hat [Hans nicht gelesen]] This book has Hans not read German I* A further prediction is made. As opposed to Icelandic and Yiddish, Faroese is an asymmetric V2 lan- guage. For Faroese I, this entails that, in embedded clauses, there is only one functional projection between the phrase headed by the complementizer and VP. As a result, an expletive can only be inserted within VP™s predicational domain. An expletive coocurring with a VP-external subject would conse- quently violate the uniqueness of predication. (i) *[coMp C Lip expletive I Ivp DP [vp . 111 So we predict that (ii) is not well formed; at this moment, we do not know whether this prediction is cor- rect. (ii) *Jon ivast i urn td bygdu nakrir islendingar h6s i Havn Faroese I John doubts on that there built some Icelanders houses in Torshavn 210 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua Ill (2001) 189-233 b. *Ich glaube [cr dass [cp dieses Buch hat [Hans nicht gelesen]]] t believe that this book has Hans not read Like German, Afrikaans is an OV language with V2 (cf. 46). It is unclear to what extent Afrikaans allows V2 in embedded clauses (see Robbers (1997) for some dis- cussion). As it will turn out, this issue does not affect the predictions made by our analysis. (46) a. [cp In hierdie jaar sal [daar verandering kom]] in this year will there change come Afrikaans b. [cp Tot alma1 se verbazing word [die meubels betyds afgelewer]] to everyone his surprise were the furniture on time delivered There is reason to believe that German has V to I, while Afrikaans does not. As (47a) shows, Afrikaans has a productive process of (VP-bound) PP extraposition (Ponelis, 1977). This process is absent in German; in as far as speakers accept a PP following the main verb (47b), that PP must be heavy or heavily stressed (Werner Abraham, Dirk Bury and Anke Liideling, p.c.). This is not required in Afrikaans (Steyn, 1996). The difference between German and Afrikaans follows immediately if in German but not Afrikaans the verb moves rightward, out of VP. (47) a. [cp Ek sal [vr die advokaat <in sy kiesafdeling> help I will the lawyer in his electoral-district help <in sy kiesafdeling>]] Afrikaans in his electoral-district b. [cp Dass [,r er [vp Zucker <beim Backer> tv <beim Backer>] kauft]], that he sugar at-the baker™s buys ist ungewohnlich German is strange b™. ??[cr Dass [,r er [vp Zucker tv] kauft] beim Backer], ist ungewijhnlich that he sugar buys at-the baker™s is strange German Moreover, several authors have argued that rich verbal inflection triggers V to I (see Section 5). According to the definitions of rich agreement proposed by Rohrbacher (1994) and Koeneman (1997, 2OOO), the German paradigm contains enough distinc- tions to trigger V to I, in contrast to the paradigm of Afrikaans, which has undergone a severe process of deflection. Again, this supports the conclusion that the verb moves out of VP in German, but not in Afrikaans. We conclude that German has V to I and asymmetric V2, while Afrikaans lacks V to I. As expected, TECS are ungrammatical in Afrikaans, because only one func- tional projection, derived by V2, is present (cf. (48a)). Afrikaans does of course allow unaccusative expletive constructions (cf. (48b)). (48) a. *[cr Daar het [vp baie mense [vp baie bier gedrink]]] Afrikaans there have many people much beer drunk 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua Ill (2001) 189-233 211 b. [cr Daar was [vr geen geld in die lopende rekening nie]] there was no money in the current account not In German main clauses, an expletive can be inserted outside VP™s predicational domain, due to the verb moving twice. This allows for TECS. In embedded clauses, there is only one functional projection between the complementizer phrase and VP, so that expletives must be inserted within VP™s predicational domain. TECS should therefore be excluded in non-root environments. Both predictions are borne out: (49) a. [cp Es hat [,r jemand [vp einen Apfel gegessenlll there has someone an apple eaten b. *[cp dass [tr es [vp jemand [vp einen Apfel gegessen hat1111 that there someone an apple eaten has German As opposed to German, Icelandic and Yiddish are symmetric V2 languages. This means that embedded clauses have two functional projections between the comple- mentizer and VP. Consequently, expletives can also be inserted outside VP™s predi- cational domain in embedded clauses alike. As a result, it is predicted, and correctly so, that embedded TECS are acceptable: (50) a. [cp aa [,-r pa6 mundi [,r einhver [vp hafa bor6aZI petta epli]]]] that there would someone have eaten this apple b. [cp az [cp es volt [,r imitser [vp gevolt esn der epl]]]] that there will someone would eat an apple Icelandic Yiddish Although the data in (48), (49a) and (50) strongly corroborate our analysis, the ungrammaticality of (49b) only provides a weak argument. Embedded TECS in Ger- man are also ruled out by the more general constraint that prevents expletive inser- tion in spec-IP altogether. As can be observed in (51), expletives cannot occur in embedded clauses either when the predicate is unaccusative. (51) [cr dass [,r (*es) [vp ein Junge gekommen ist]]] that there a boy come is German Expletive insertion as in (51) does not violate the ban on unmotivated movement, since at LF the trace in object position is properly licensed: It receives a O-role from V. Although the ungrammaticality of (51) is only addressed occasionally (Cardi- naletti, 1990), it should of course be incorporated in any theory of expletives. In the next section we will show that the pattern reoccurs in the other languages that allow for TECS. We argue that it follows from predication theory, given a particular view of v to I. 212 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman / Lingua I!! (2001) 189-233 5. Inflection-related movement and expletive insertion 5.1. The issue It is striking that in languages allowing TECS, expletives never show up in the first functional projection dominating VP, not even if the verb is unaccusative. If the expletive is not generated at all, however, the resulting sentence is grammatical. This is shown for Icelandic in (52).19 (52) a. b. 
C. [cp PaZT hefur [ip [vr komi6 str&ur]]] there has come a boy [cp I gaer hefur [ir (*baa) [vr komib str6kurlll yesterday has there come a boy [Cp Af hverju hefur [ip (*pa@ vp komiB strakurl]]? why has there come a boy Icelandic As noted in the previous section, the ban on unmotivated movement does not rule out expletive insertion in unaccusative structures, since at LF the trace in object posi- tion is properly licensed. Whereas (53a) is correctly predicted to be grammatical, it is unclear why (53b) is ruled out. (53) a. [cr expletive C [ir I [vp V DPIII b. [cp (XP) C [,r (*expletive) I [vr V DPIII The pattern in (53) extends beyond Icelandic. Parallel data are found in Yiddish and German. Again, not generating an expletive at all yields a grammatical result. (54) a. b. C. (55) a. b. C. Lcp Es iz tip Lvp gekumen a yingUll there is come a boy [cp Nekhtn iz hp (*es) [vr gekumen a yingl]]] yesterday is there come a boy [Cp Far vos iz [,r (*es) [vr gekumen a yingl]]] why is there come a boy tcp Es ist [rp [vr ein Junge gekommen]]] there is a boy come [Cp Gestem ist [ip (*es) [vr ein Junge gekommen]]] gestern ist there a boy come [Cp Warum ist [ii, (*es) [vr ein Junge gekommen]]] why ist there a boy come Yiddish German I9 Dutch is a potential counterexample. It allows both TECS and expletive insertion in what seems to be spec-IP. In Appendix A we argue that Dutch does not have V to I, and that what appear to be expletives are adverbials. 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 213 We established earlier that in embedded clauses German has one functional projec- tion between VP and the complementizer whereas Icelandic and Yiddish have two. It is therefore in line with the pattern in (53) that expletives can immediately follow the complementizer in Icelandic and Yiddish but not in German. (56) a. [cp d [cp paa hefur [ip komiB stnikur]]] that there has come a boy Icelandic b. [cr. az [cr es iz [ip gekumen a yingl]]] that there is come a boy Yiddish c. [Cp dass [rp (*es) [vp ein Junge gekommen ist]]] that there a boy come is German We will now argue that the above data follow from the interaction between V to I and the operation that attaches the associate to the expletive. The latter has already been discussed in the previous sections; let us therefore consider the trigger for V to I in more detail. 5.2. The syntax of inflection-related movement Whether or not V to I takes place depends on the status of inflection in a lan- guage. There is a strong correlation between this movement and rich agreement: Languages with rich agreement have V to I, while V to I is typically absent in lan- guages with poor agreement (Kosmeijer, 1986; Platzack and Holmberg, 1989; Roberts, 1993; Rohrbacher, 1994; Koeneman, 1997,200O and others). Why would this be? Rich agreement encodes more person and number features than poor agreement. This implies that affixes which are part of a rich inflectional paradigm have more referential force (Rohrbacher, 1994). Suppose now that elements with a sufficient specification for person and number must be interpreted as argu- ments. Then rich inflection must, in the course of the derivation, occupy a position where it can be associated with VP™s thematic function.*O This idea of ‚I-subjects™ echoes earlier work by Borer (1986) and Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou (1998). We propose is that the verb enters the derivation fully inflected. If inflection is poor, the verb remains in situ (abstracting away from V2). If inflection is sufficiently rich, this is not an option. As VP cannot O-mark an element contained in it, the inflectional argument would remain without a thematic function. Therefore, the verb must move out of VP and reproject (for reasons that will become obvious when we proceed, we will not use the descriptive labels IP and CP from now on): (57) a. [vp . . . [v V II . . . I b. [vr . . . [v V I] [vp . . . tv . . . II *O Rich subject agreement cannot receive an internal O-role from V because it is lexically associated with VP™s external properties. We cannot discuss here how this association is encoded, but see Neele- man and Weerman (1999) for one proposal. 214 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua III (2001) 189-233 In this structure, I can be related with VP™s thematic function. It is m-commanded by VP and it c-commands this category according to a definition of c-command in terms of dominating categories (see Section 2.1 for discussion). Note that neither Borer (1986) nor Alexiadou and Anagnostopoulou (1998) extend their notion of I- subject to structures with a thematic subject. If V to I is triggered by the argumental status of inflection in a language, one might expect that it can be postponed until LF, where O-theory is located. Never- theless, in the languages discussed so far, argumental inflection leads to overt verb movement. We believe that this is due to limitations on covert movement operations. In particular, we would like to suggest that no new projections may be introduced after overt syntax, an idea reminiscent of Chomsky ‚s (1995) claim that merger at LF is severely restricted. As a result, lexical insertion at LF is banned. Since V to I is a structure-creating operation in the system proposed here, and not an instance of adjunction, it must also take place in overt syntax. In this way, a limitation on covert operations causes an LF condition to have overt effects. Given that the inflectional affix saturates VP™s O-role in the structure in (57) what is the status of the DP usually analyzed as the subject in languages with V to I? The most natural assumption is that this DP is not an argument. Rather it is a specifier, not only in the X-bar theoretical sense of the word, but also, one might say, with respect to its interpretation. It narrows down the interpretation of the actual grammatical subject, I, through specifier-head agreement. Note that this relation, indicated by italics in (58), is one between a maximal projection and a head. There- fore no dependency relation can be established by means of a syntactic chain (given the condition of chain uniformity). This leaves specifier-head agreement as the only option provided by the grammar.2™ (58) [VP DP [v V rl [VP . . . tv --. II The assumption that in (58) the EPP is satisfied by the inflectional affix on the verb entails that, in principle, the DP specifier can be absent from the structure (see Alex- iadou and Anagnostopoulou (1998) for related discussion). This explains the phe- nomenon of pro drop (Taraldsen, 1978; Rizzi, 1982). In a language like Italian, the specifier in (58) may be absent:22 21 Three remarks are in order here. First, the specifier of the inflectional argument must presumably be classified as an A-position, as it does not interfere with operator movement (see note 22 for further dis- cussion). Second, the trace left by movement from the specifier of I to an expletive in spec-CP is suffi- ciently motivated, as the specification function cannot be entertained in the position marked by the expletive. This is a slight adaptation of the proposal in Section 3. Third, the concord in phi features between the subject and the verb in languages with V to I is a consequence of specifier-head agreement. In languages without V to I, concord is achieved through feature sharing in relations of local binding. The subject binds VP, and hence agrees in features with VP™s head. There is, in fact, independent moti- vation for feature sharing in binding relations. In many languages, depictives and other secondary pred- icates agree with their subjects. Similarly, anaphors agree with their antecedents. ** One may now wonder whether I ever takes a specifier in pro-drop languages. Indeed, it is sometimes argued that preverbal subjects in Italian and Spanish occupy an A™-position (the term ‚subject™ is used 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman 1 Lingua Ill (2001) 189-233 215 (59) [VP [v Pa+01 [VP hll speak-lst.sg. Italian An analysis along these lines renders the postulation of an element like pro super- fluous in structures like (59), although it does not as such provide arguments against the presence of pro. Not all languages with V to I allow omission of the DP, because sometimes agree- ment encodes enough phi features to be interpretable but not enough to stand on its own. Missing features must be supplied by a specifier. In short, the following classi- fication of inflection obtains : (60) Scale of Inflection Poor Middle Class Rich No V to I / No pro drop V to I / No pro drop V to I / Pro drop In order to make precise predictions, more content has to be given to the various types of agreement. It would take us too far afield to do so here.23 For the European languages at least, it seems to be correct that poor agreement paradigms do not trig- ger movement or license null subjects, while rich agreement leads to both V to I and pro drop. Languages with what we call middle class agreement have V to I but their inflectional argument requires further specification. Crucially, languages with Ital- ian-style pro drop but without V to I are ruled out. Although sufficiently rich inflection triggers V to I, it is not the case that such a verb movement is always triggered by rich inflection. French is poorly inflected (abstracting away from spelling) and yet the language has V to I. Work by Anthony Kroch suggests that such an exceptional situation may reflect a stage in language change. Older stages of French did have rich inflection and therefore featured V to I. After deflection, the syntactic trigger for V to I disappeared. However, positive evidence from the older generation still forced the child to adopt a peripheral move- ment rule, perhaps comparable to the kind of rules involved in L2 acquisition.24 here to refer to DPs associated with an inflectional argument). However, as Cardinaletti (1997) argues, the data discussed by Barbosa (1996) and others show that preverbal subjects can be left-dislocated, not that they must be. This option is hardly surprising if specification of 1 is not obligatory in pro drop lan- guages (in non-pro-drop languages, left dislocation of subjects is impossible in the absence of an overt pronominal). In what follows we assume that 1 can, but does have to, take a specifier in languages like Italian. 23 Pinker (1984) argues that inflectional features must be acquired on the basis of overt morphological contrasts. This implies that if a language has less distinct verbal forms, less features will be postulated by the child. Koeneman (1997,200O) develops this idea, arguing that the contrast between poor and mid- dle class inflection can be characterized as follows. In order for agreement to be argumental three fea- tures must be present: [+/-speaker], [+/-addressee] and [+/-singular]. Inflectional forms in Italian and Icelandic sufficiently motivate these features but whereas each of them is specified in each form in Ital- ian, the Icelandic paradigm contains affixes that are underspecified. Arguably, this is what underlies the contrast between middle class and rich agreement. 24 Independent evidence for the claim that French V to I is not triggered by inflectional properties of the verb is given in Sections 5.3 and 6.2. The type of grammar competition proposed by Kroch (1989) may also shed some light on the complex status of V to I in Faroese. 216 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman i Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 There is some evidence that the situation in French is unstable. In many varieties of the language, subject clitics seem to develop into verbal agreement. According to Sankoff (1982), for example, subjects co-occur with subject clitics in as much as 80% of sentences in spoken French (thus, Jean il parle is used instead of Jean par/e). A reanalysis of subject clitics as agreement markers is expected as the child will attempt to find a grammatical trigger for the movement it is confronted with (see for related discussion Muller, 1984; Roberge, 1986; Auger, 1992; Rohrbacher, 1994.) 5.3. Consequences for expletive insertion Let us now return to the question of why V to I languages do not allow insertion of expletives in spec-IP (recall that this is a descriptive term). As we have seen, ele- ments in spec-IP are not arguments. They satisfy full interpretation by entering into a specifier-head relation with I. Consider now what happens if the specifier of I con- tains an expletive to which some DP has moved: (61) *[w KWetivel DPI [V V 4 [VP tv WI The structure is ungrammatical, since the DP adjoined to the expletive violates full interpretation. As argued in Section 2, a VP containing a trace is interpreted as a predicate at LF. However, the adjoined DP cannot be interpreted as the subject of this predicate, since VP™s thematic function is already assigned to Z. The adjoined DP cannot be interpreted through specifier-head agreement either, since the specifier position of IP is already filled by the expletive: DP is adjoined to a specifier rather than a specifier itself. Put differently, the inflectional argument finds an expletive in its specifier position, and not a DP that narrows down its interpretation. Since the adjoined DP can neither be interpreted as an argument nor through specifier-head agreement with an inflectional argument, the derivation crashes.25 2s In languages with rich agreement expletive may not usually occur in the specifier of the first func- tional projection dominating VP. However, as an anonymous remarks, the Northern Italian dialect Fiorentino might be a counterexample to this generalization: (i) a. Gl™e venuto delle ragazze/la Maria Fiorentino there is come some girlslMaria Although we do not have a full-fledged account of this dialect, we are not sure whether gli should nec- essarily be analyzed as an expletive. For instance, it does not induce a definiteness effect. Moreover, as discussed in Brandi and Cordin (1989), subject clitics are obligatory in Fiorentino, whether a DP subject is present or not (cf. (ii)). Similar data do not obtain in standard Italian. (ii) a. (*La) parla Fiorentino she speaks b. La Maria (*la) parla the Maria she speaks For this reason, Brandi and Cordin analyze subject clitics as agreement markers. If correct, this analysis would naturally extend to the impersonal clitic in (i). Gli could be classified as default agreement rather than as an element marking the LF position of the subject. On such an analysis, the specifier of the first functional projection dominating VP remains empty in overt syntax, as expected. 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 217 From this analysis, several predictions follow. To begin with, the structure in (61) would be grammatical if the expletive were absent. In that case, the LF structure that results from movement of the object would be the one in (62). This structure is grammatical, since DP can narrow down the interpretation of the inflectional argu- ment through specifier-head agreement. (62) [VP Df™ [v V rl [VP tv bll It is correctly predicted, then that in Icelandic, German and Yiddish expletives are inserted in spec-CP. If this position is already filled or otherwise inaccessible, expletive insertion is blocked. Indeed, the grammaticality of (51), (52b,c), (54b,c) and (55b,c) depends on whether or not an expletive is generated. (Of course, the optionality of NP raising in these structure must still be explained. We address this issue in Section 6.) The structure in (61) would also be grammatical if no inflectional argument were present. In that case, the adjoined DP could simply be interpreted as the subject of VP: (63) [VP [[expletive] DP] V [vp . . . fop . . . ]] Obviously, within a language there is no choice of generating or not generating inflection: The elsewhere principle requires that the most fully specified verb form is used in any given context. The implication is that the effects of inflection for expletive insertion can only be observed if we compare languages. One instantiation of the structure in (63) is found in Mainland Scandinavian. Since Mainland Scandi- navian has V2 but no V to I, a well-formed main clause has one functional projec- tion on top of VP. The prediction is that an expletive can be inserted in the specifier of this projection. In the absence of argumental inflection, the associate can be inter- preted as the subject of VP after raising: (64) a. [vp Der er [vp tv kommet en dreng]] there is come a boy Danish b. [vp [Der [en dreng]] er [vp tv kommet tnr]] there a boy is come English lacks rich inflection. However, it does have a class of verbal elements, namely the modals, that can be taken from the lexicon and merged with a VP-pred- icate, thereby creating an extra projection. The prediction is that this projection allows for expletive insertion. Since argumental inflection is absent, the associate of the expletive can again be interpreted as the subject: (65) a. [vp There may [vp arrive a few new guests tomorrow]] (overt syntax) b. [vp [There [a few new guests]] may [vp arrive to, tomorrow]] (LF) English and Mainland Scandinavian confirm, then, that what blocks expletive inser- tion in (51), (52b,c), (54b,c) and (55b,c) is the presence of an inflectional argument. 218 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 This argument can be strengthened on the basis of French. This language is exceptional in that it has V to I in the absence of rich inflection, as argued in Section 5.2. Consequently, it provides a third instantiation of the structure in (63). As opposed to the other V to I languages, French allows expletive insertion in spec-IP (cf. (66)). This further corroborates our claim that expletive insertion is blocked by rich inflection. (66) 11 est venu un garcon there is come a boy French The proposed analysis accounts for a well-known contrast between Mainland Scan- dinavian on the one hand and Icelandic, Yiddish and German on the other. Recall that Mainland Scandinavian has V2 but no V to I. Hence, TECS are excluded: It is impossible to generate an expletive in spec-CP if the subject is adjoined to VP. How- ever, there is nothing that excludes the expletive in Mainland Scandinavian from being adjoined to an unaccusative VP. The following LF representation is grammat- ical (see Section 3): (67) [VP [there [WI [VP V bll A structure like (67) can never be extended by V to I, since in that case the unicity of predication would be violated. There would be two competitors for VP™s O-role, namely the inflection on the verb and the associate of the expletive. Since VP can take only one subject, one of these elements would violate full interpretation. In con- trast, nothing prohibits extension of (67) by V2. Suppose that V moves and a con- stituent other than the object is fronted. This yields the order XP-Vf-expletive-VP, which is precisely the order excluded in languages allowing TECS. The ungrammati- cality of this order in V to I languages has already been illustrated by (52), (54) and (55). The grammatical Danish and Swedish examples appear below. (68) a. [vr Ig&/Hvorfor er [vp der [,,r kommet en dreng]]] yesterdaylwhy is there come a boy Danish b. Idag/Varfiir har det kommit m&rga lingvister hit todaylwhy have there come many linguists here Swedish Given that Afrikaans has V2 but lacks V to I, we correctly predict it to pattern with Mainland Scandinavian : (69) [vp In die koerant word [vp daar [vr sekere aantyginge gemaak]]] Afrikaans in the paper were there certain accusations made A similar contrast should exist between German and the Mainland Scandinavian lan- guages. Recall that German is an asymmetric V2 language with V to I. Hence, the possibility of generating expletives in embedded clauses is effectively ruled out, both with transitive and unaccusative predicates (cf. (51)). There is no reason, however, 0. Koeneman. A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 219 why the structure in (67) could not be embedded under a complementizer. Hence, we correctly predict that the examples in (70), where the expletive follows the comple- mentizer, are grammatical. (70) a. [cp at [vp der [,,r er kommet en dreng]]] that there is come a boy Danish b. [cp att lvp det [vp har kommit m&nga lingvister hit]]] that there have come many linguists here Swedish To summarize, the distribution of expletives in Germanic presents us with the fol- lowing paradox. The languages with the largest functional domain have more room for the insertion of expletives, which explains why they allow for TECS. Nevertheless, in such languages expletives can appear in fewer positions than in languages with a smaller functional domain. In Icelandic, for example, expletives occur in spec-CP only, whereas a second, lower position is available in Mainland Scandinavian. More structure, therefore, does not necessarily entail more freedom. It is precisely this paradox that the V to I parameter as formulated here helps to solve. 6. Overt effects of the extended projection principle 6.1. Optional NP raising Throughout, we have assumed that the EPP holds at LF. VP is mapped onto a pred- icate and must therefore take a subject at the LF interface. This would seem to imply that in order to circumvent economy violations NP raising must be postponed (assuming that economy favours covert operations, see Chomsky, 1995). The pro- posed analysis of NP raising suggests a different conclusion, however, namely that NP raising is syntactically optional. This conclusion, we argue, is correct. Let us start by distinguishing two syntactic operations. The first is movement, a purely mechanical procedure by which an element is removed from the syntactic tree and merged in a different position. The other operation is chain formation, which is one way of associating a moved element and the trace it leaves behind. If the dis- tinction is correct, the question arises which operation economy applies to. What we propose is that economy is sensitive to chain formation. No costs are attached to movement itself, as movement is simply re-merger and merger is costless on standard assumptions. But if a moved element and its trace are combined into a chain, thus forming a discontinuous syntactic expression, economy comes into play (Poole, 1996). Of course, chain formation is almost always forced. A wu-moved argument, for example, must form a chain with its trace in order to satisfy the O-cri- terion. Hence, in the vast majority of cases the proposal made here does not differ empirically from the standard view.26 26 Brady (1995) argues that grammatical theory should not relate a trace to its antecedent by both chain formation and a rule of movement. Note, however, that on our proposal movement is not a rule that 220 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 In one case, however, chain formation is unnecessary. We have argued that the trace of NP raising is bound by a lambda operator introduced at the VP level. The structure in (71a) is interpreted as in (71b), which is in turn applied to the derived subject (Kitagawa, 1989; Williams, 1994; Chierchia, 1995). (71) a. ]vr V 4 b. lx [VP V 031 Given that the moved DP and the trace are related through other means, chain for- mation is unnecessary in the case of NP raising. Economy considerations therefore dictate that no chain formation take place, a conclusion which may shed some light on the observation that NP raising does not display reconstruction effects in the way that WH movement does.27 If we are right in that NP raising does not involve chain formation, structures with covert and with overt raising may coexist: Neither induces computational costs avoided by the other, with syntactic optionality as a consequence. As we have already seen, this is the correct result for quite a few languages. In Italian, for exam- ple, covert raising exists alongside its overt counterpart:28 (72) [vp <Due navi> affondarono [vp tv <due navi>]] two ships sank two ships Italian The same is true for other languages with V to I, as the Icelandic and Yiddish data in (72) show: (73) a. [,-r Paa hafa [,,r <margir menn> tv [vp tv komi6 <margir menn> there have many men come many men hingaa i dag]]] Icelandic here today b. [cr Es vert [vp <an epl> tv [vp tv gegesn <an epl>]]] there was an apple eaten an apple Yiddish relates a moved element to its trace: it is simply the second merger of material already present in the tree. Indeed, in the case of NP raising the trace is bound by an element other than the element that moves. Thus, there is no conceptual overlap, we believe, just as there is no overlap between chain for- mation and merger of elements selected from the lexicon. *™ Of course, the interpretation of certain other constructions also involve lambda operators. Null oper- ator movement and WH movement are examples. However, chain formation is forced in such structures by syntactic conditions such as the O-criterion. On our analysis of NP raising, however, both the derived subject and the trace are associated with a thematic role, so that both satisfy the O-criterion without the formation of a chain. ** We call the optional movement in Italian raising, as we have analyzed its landing site as an A-posi- tion (see notes 21 and 22). The nature of the landing site does not bear on the issue of optionality, how- ever. What is crucial is that the trace is bound by the lambda operator, whereas the moved element is interpreted as the specifier of argumental inflection. Hence, no chain formation is necessary. 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua Ill (2001) 189-233 221 Similarly, NP raising is optional in OV languages like German, Afrikaans and Dutch (Weerman, 1989). Usually, indirect objects may not precede subjects in these lan- guages, but with unaccusative predicates this order is allowed. More precisely, the derived subject may either precede or follow the indirect object, suggesting that it raises optionally: (74) a. [cr dass [vr cdeine Geschichten> [vr meinem Btuder <deine Geschichten> tv] that your stories my brother your stories gefielen]] German pleased b. [c- dat [vr <die vis> [vr vir die katte <die vis> gegee is]]] that the fish to the cats the fish given is c. [cP dat [,,r <de foto™s> [vp Jan <de foto™s> getoond werden]] that the pictures Jan the pictures shown were Afrikaans Dutch The syntactic optionality of NP raising does not imply that the two variants are equivalent in all respects. Typically, syntactic variants are assigned different prag- matic values. In the case at hand, the logical subject tends to express old information if it surfaces external to VP, whereas it tends to express new information if it sur- faces in its base position (Diesing, 1989; Calabrese, 1991; Vangsnes, 1995; Jons- son, 1996). Note, however, that these interpretations cannot be inherently linked to the positions occupied by the subject. In languages with obligatory NP raising (see Section 6.2) the subject always surfaces external to VP, yet it does not always express old information. This suggests that pragmatic specialization of structures is the result, and not the explanation, of syntactic optionality (Wiltschko, 1995; Rein- hart, 1996). For example, elements in the left periphery are more easily interpreted as topics than elements further to the right. Hence, the raising structure is typically associated with a topic interpretation of the subject. Our account for the optionality of NP raising makes a further prediction. In most constructions a trace cannot appear without an antecedent, because it is the antecedent that binds the trace. However, if a trace can be bound by VP™s lambda operator, it can be generated even in the absence of a raised nominal. Of course, the external argument role of VP must be assigned, which usually requires the presence of such a nominal. The prediction can be tested, however, in languages with argu- mental inflection. As argued in the previous section, VP™s external O-role is assigned to I in such languages. If I is rich enough to stand on its own, we expect that a trace can be inserted in object position without there being a DP subject: (75) [VP ]ﬂ V II [VP tv tll In other words, pro drop should be possible with ergative predicates, which is of course correct : (76) ivp iv affondamml [VP tv 41 Italian sank-3rd.pl. 222 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua Ill (2001) 189-233 The conclusion that NP trace appears on its own in (76) can be circumvented by say- ing that pro is present in spec-IP. This is a possibility, but as we have seen before subject omission in languages like Italian can be analyzed without pro. If we hold on to this minimal theory, data like (76) provide an additional argument for the pro- posed interpretation of NP trace. An anonymous reviewer suggests that it might be more appropriate to label the trace in (76) pro since it is not part of a syntactic chain. Note, however, that the the- ory we propose employs an empty variable in raising structures like (71)-(75) as well as in structures involving A™-movement. In other words, the empty categories under discussion may differ in the syntactic relations that they entertain (forced by independent principles), but they are identical in their inherent properties. To summarize, the assumption that predication theory holds at LF at first sight seems to predict that NP raising should be procrastinated. We have argued, however, that the syntax of NP raising is such that it is irrelevant to economy considerations. Hence, it is in principle optional. This leaves the opposite problem: why is NP rais- ing (or insertion of an expletive) obligatory in certain languages. In the remainder of this section we will argue that a non-syntactic factor is responsible for this. 6.2. A discourse-based explanation According to Williams (1997), the dependent element in an anaphoric relation must either follow, or be in a subordinate clause to, the antecedent. Williams calls this condition the ‚general pattern of anaphoric dependence™ (GPAD). Some examples illustrating it are given in (77) (‚#™ marks non-syntactic ill-formedness). The pronoun it can be dependent on term paper in (77a-c), but not in (77d). (77) a. Anyone [who has written his term mzoer] can turn it in to me now b. Anyone [who has written &] can turn his term paper in to me now c. Anyone can turn his term paper in to me now [who has written ti] d. #Anyone can turn it in to me now [who has written his TERM PAPER] (77d) is infelicitous, because the anaphoric relation is forward and the dependent is not subordinated. Term paper is capitalized to signify that it has main stress. This implies that it does not itself refer back to some preceding instance of the same DP. The GPAD predicts that when subordination of the dependent is impossible, anaphora must be backward. Indeed, in cases of intersentential anaphora, the antecedent must always precede the dependent. Thus, he can be dependent on John in (78a), but not in (78b) (Ariel, 1990; Jackendoff, 1990; Ernst, 1994 and others). As before, John is stressed to avoid it referring back to an earlier instance of the same DP. (78) a. J& walked in. He was wearing a helmet. b. #& walked in. JOHN was wearing a helmet. Recall that, following Williams (1980, 1994, 1997), we have analyzed predication as an anaphoric relation between a dependent element (the predicate) and an antecedent 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua Ill (2001) 189-233 223 (the subject). If this analysis is correct, the subject must either precede the predicate or be located in a clause subordinate to it. The latter case is independently ruled out, given that predication requires m-command by the predicate. Consequently, the sub- ject must precede VP (Walinska de Hackbeil, 1989; Dechaine 1993; indeed #reads a book John is ill-formed). In this context, precedence must be understood in terms of the human parser. Dis- course conditions apply on line while the parser analyzes the input string. Hence the category to be construed as the subject precedes the VP-predicate in the relevant sense, if it is available before the VP-predicate is postulated. The latter happens, we assume, when the parser encounters the verb or inserts a trace as the root of a verbal chain. Consequently, the exact prediction that the GPAD makes for predication is that the LF subject must linearly precede the verb (or its trace). As we will now show, it follows which languages have, and which languages do not have, optional NP raising. Recall that, as far as syntax is concerned, NP raising is optional. So, the syntax of English allows both (79a) and (79b) as surface representations. According to the GPAD, however, (79a) is ill-formed. (79) a. #[vp Arrived a famous linguist] yesterday b. A famous linguist [vr arrived to,] yesterday The parser postulates the predicative category VP when it encounters the verb (there is no V to I in English). This entails that the category construed as VP™s subject, a famous linguist, is introduced too late in (79a). The same patterns can be observed in Mainland Scandinavian: (80) a. IgHr er <en dreng> kommet <#en dreng> yesterday is a boy come a boy Danish b. Idag har <m&rga lingvisten kommit 4fmanga lingvister> hit today have many linguists come many linguists here Swedish We will now show that our theory predicts that optional NP raising is a property of OV languages and languages with V to I. Let us first consider why V to I would be relevant. In Section 5 we have argued that rich inflection triggers verb movement because it must be interpreted as the subject of VP. The consequence is that lan- guages with V to I meet the GPAD without NP raising. The parser postulates the pred- icative category VP when it inserts the trace of the moved verb in a language like Italian or Icelandic (cf. (81)). At that point, argumental inflection has already been encountered, so that a subject for VP can be found even if no overt DP movement takes place (cf. (72), (73)). (81) . . . [v V II [VP ... tv . ..I1 (I precedes tv) 13 2 (parsing steps) That optional NP-raising is associated with rich inflection rather than with V to I movement is corroborated by French. Recall from Section 5.2 that French has V to I 224 0. Koeneman. A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 even though it lacks rich inflection. Three predictions follow from this: (i) French tolerates expletives in spec-IP, (ii) French lacks pro drop and (iii) NP raising should be obligatory in French. This third prediction is relevant here. Since no inflectional argument precedes the base position of the verb as a result of V to I, unaccusative subjects cannot remain in their base position. Indeed, there is no optionality in exam- ples like (82). (82) <Trois hommes> arrivent <#trois hommes> three men arrive three men Let us next consider why the basic order of object and verb would be relevant. As said, the VP-predicate is postulated when the parser encounters the verb (or inserts the verb™s trace). In unaccusative structures in OV languages, the category to be con- strued as subject is available before the parser postulates the VP-predicate. This is the case, even if that DP does not raise overtly. When the parser encounters the verb in (83) and postulates the VP-predicate, it can construe the already parsed DP as sub- ject by shifting it to a VP-external position. Thus, (83) complies with the GPAD. (83) . . Ivp . . . DP . . . V] (DP precedes V) 3 1 2 (parsing steps) To repeat, a similar parse is not possible in VO languages (without V to I). When the parser encounters the verb in (84), the DP in object position not yet available. Hence, a dependent category is postulated that lacks an antecedent.29 (84) # . . . [vr . . . V DP . ..] (DP follows V) 2 1 3 (parsing steps) We conclude, then, that in OV languages NP raising is optional, irrespective of whether V to I takes place (cf. (74)). In VO languages, V to I is a prerequisite for optional raising. Note that it is very difficult to describe this state of affairs in syn- tactic terms. OV languages and VO languages with V to I do not form a natural class. As argued, the data are captured relatively straightforwardly by an indepen- dently motivated discourse condition. Let us finally return to expletive constructions. Crucially, overt NP raising is no longer necessary if an expletive is inserted in English and Mainland Scandinavian. Apparently, expletives can be used to satisfy the GPAD: (85) a. There arrived a famous linguist yesterday b. Igar er der kommet en dreng yesterday is there come a boy English Danish 29 Our account does not rule out VSO languages, as in such languages the verb has arguably been fronted (Emonds, 1981; Sproat, 1985, amongst others). Hence, it is the trace of the verb that is relevant for the GPAD. Verb second structures in which the subject follows the verb are unproblematic for the same reason. 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 225 c. Idag har det kommit m&rga lingvister hi today have there come many linguists here Swedish We have argued that expletives overtly mark LF subject positions. This implies that when the parser encounters an expletive, it knows that a subject will adjoin to it. The effects of the input string are maximized in parsing in that as much information as possible is translated into structure. Consequently, the parser creates a DP-adjunct to the expletive whose content is later supplied by the subject30 It is this underspecified DP-adjunct that satisfies the GPAD in examples like (85): (86) [[there] eor] . . . [vp . . . V DP . . . ] 1 2 4 3 5 (enr precedes V) (parsing steps) 7. Concluding remarks 7.1. Summary and evaluation At the heart of this paper lies a theory of predication according to which VP must find a unique subject in its m-command domain. In conjunction with other assump- tions, this theory explains (i) why the verb must move twice in TECS, (ii) why inflec- tion, if sufficiently rich, blocks expletive insertion in spec-IP, and (iii) why NP rais- ing is optional in OV languages and languages with V to I. Let us briefly summarize how these results obtain. The distribution of TECS follows from the interaction of predication theory with independently motivated verb movement parameters. TECS are allowed if the exple- tive can be generated outside VP™s predicational domain, a possibility dependent on the functional structure of a language. Assuming that overt verb movement is indica- tive of available structure, it follows that TECS only occur if verb undergoes both V2 and V to I (Vikner™s generalization). Predication theory also provides a trigger for V to I. We have argued that verbal inflection is argumental if sufficiently rich. Argumental inflection triggers verb movement, as such movement will allow it to be construed as VP™s subject. Exple- tive insertion in spec-IP is consequently excluded, as the associate can neither be interpreted as subject (I already fulfills this function) nor as the specifier of I (this position is filled by the expletive). Predication theory forces us to analyze NP raising as a process of predicate for- mation that licenses the derived subject. In other words, although NP trace has a relation with VP and VP has a relation with the derived subject, there is no chain that connects the subject and the trace. If economy is sensitive to chain formation, it fol- lows that NP raising is optional from a syntactic point of view. Where it is not 3o Of course, the underspecified DP adjunct is never present in syntax. It is a very common assumption in parsing theory that incomplete parses contain underspecified structure. 226 0. Koeneman. A. Neeleman I Lingua 11 I (2001) 189-233 optional, this is due to a non-syntactic condition on anaphoric relations, of which predication is one. We cannot exhaustively discuss analyses of expletives proposed in the literature. Let us instead briefly indicate why most analyses face difficulties when confronted with the three observations made above. It is commonly assumed, contra predication theory, that there is a specific subject position, let us say spec-IP, which must be filled in overt syntax (the standard EPP). The function of the expletives is to fill spec- IP in the absence of a subject. If so, it is hard to understand why in languages with V to I expletives may not sur- face in spec-IP. After all, it is this position that they are supposed to fill. Moreover, if both expletive insertion and NP raising are associated with the requirement that spec-IP be filled, one would expect NP raising to be obligatory in the absence of an expletive and to be blocked if an expletive is inserted. We have seen, however, that neither prediction is correct. In Icelandic, for example, NP raising is optional in the presence of an expletive and expletive insertion is optional whether or not NP rais- ing takes place. The assumption that expletives are inserted in spec-IP also prevents a straightfor- ward account of Vikner™s generalization. At first sight, this assumption excludes TECS altogether, as the subject and the expletive compete for the same position. The solution proposed in recent analyses is that V to I licenses a second specifier in the IP domain, so that subjects and expletives may cooccur. Although this is not unrea- sonable, it does not explain why TECS only occur in languages with V2. Of course, it may be possible to remedy these problems, but in our opinion this is beside the point. The problems originate in the claim that there is a specific subject position that must be filled and, as argued, they do not arise if this claim is aban- doned. 7.2. Variation in clause structure and semantics One property that sets the analysis developed here apart from much recent theo- rizing is that it assumes variation in clause structure both across and within lan- guages. This may give rise to some concerns regarding the relation between syntax and semantics. In theories based on a uniform syntactic structure, particular seman- tic properties are syntactically encoded by particular functional heads, thus allowing a maximally transparent mapping at LF. In contrast, flexibility in clause structure seems to require more complicated mappings. Although this may be true, it is not necessarily an argument against flexibility. In a modular grammar, a simplification of one component does not always have over- all beneficial effects. As is well known, there must be a delicate balance between phrase structure rules and transformations in order for an optimal theory to result. Overly simplifying the transformational component leads to disproportionate com- plications in phrase structure rules and vice versa. Complete transparency in the mapping from syntax to semantics has comparable repercussions. It necessitates a number of (sometimes quite complicated) syntactic operations that reconcile the structure postulated at LF with the surface form of a sentence. Given that complete 0. Koeneman, A, Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 221 transparency comes at a price, analyses based on flexibility in clause structure can- not be rejected a priori. This is not to say that certain empirical questions do not arise. For each semantic notion N, one can ask whether it must be syntactically encoded, and if so, whether it must be encoded in a uniform way. Let us begin by discussing the first question. Answering it affirmatively amounts to saying that even if N has neither distributional nor morphological effects in a particular language, it nevertheless corresponds to a syntactic object, say a functional head. It is not immediately obvious how the analy- sis of the language at hand would benefit from this. On the contrary, one may be forced to complicate a straightforward analysis by adopting principles which undo predictions made by the postulated projection. The problem becomes worse if N is paradigmatic in that it subsumes various distinct semantic notions (say N,-N,) in languages that encode it overtly (N could be tense, with Nl-N5 representing present, past, future, etc.). The theory of uniform encoding now requires a five-way syntactic ambiguity in order to explain why what seems to be a single sentence on the surface can be associated with each of N™s paradigmatic variants. No complications of this type are necessary on the flexible theory: if N is not encoded in a language it will neither have syntactic nor interpretational effects. Even if there is variation in what is encoded, one may think that encoded seman- tic notions are always encoded in the same way. There is ample evidence, however, that comparable semantics does not necessarily imply comparable syntax. In Dutch, for example, both the syntactic construction in (87a) and the morphological con- struction in (87b) can be used to express that the house is small. (87) a. Een klein huis a small house b. Een huis-je a house-DIM The two structures are not equivalent in all respects, but in many instances they yield near-identical semantics. Note that the operations required to assign (87a) and (87b) an identical LF are not trivial, given that the AP in (87a) is a specifier or adjunct, while the corresponding expression in (87b) is a nominal affix. Doetjes et al. (1999) discuss a similar case of variation. They show that expres- sions that encode the semantics of degree fall into two main classes: those with syn- tactic properties associated with functional heads (giving rise to the structure in (88a)) and those with the syntactic properties associated with adjoined categories (giving rise to the structure in (88b)). W-0 a. begs Deg API b. [AP DegP API Thus, there does not seem to be a uniform syntactic translation of the semantic notion of degree. Note that, as before, standard syntactic operations cannot easily relate the structures in (Ma) and (88b) to an identical LF. 228 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 On the basis of this type of evidence - there are many similar examples - we con- clude that there is variation in the way semantic information is encoded. But if this is so, the mere existence of a verbal affix expressing past tense or imperfect aspect does not imply that a tense or aspect projection is present - it may well be that the language in question encodes tense and aspect morphologically. Consequently, whether an affix corresponds with a syntactic projection must be a matter of linguis- tic inquiry (see Koeneman (2000) for a particular proposal relating projection of tense and V2). Qualitative and quantitative variation in syntactic encoding implies that evidence for functional projections must first and foremost be syntactic. The fact that the grammaticality of TECS corresponds nicely with the presence of such evidence sug- gests to us that a flexible approach to clause structure projection is worth exploring. Appendix A: Other expletive-like elements In this paper we have ignored certain elements that have been labelled expletives in the lit- erature. This appendix explains why they should not be analyzed as marking the LF position of the subject. First, consider the pronominal that appears in (la). Following Bennis (1986) and Vikner (1995), we analyze this element as a true argument which is coreferential with an adjunct clause. An analysis along these lines is corroborated by the fact that the pronominal may appear in clearly O-marked positions (cf. lb,c), in which case it must indeed be argumental and the associated clause must indeed occupy a non-thematic position. Furthermore, clauses associated to pronouns can often be omitted and they are islands for certain types of extrac- tion (Bennis, 1986: 104). (1) a. It is obvious (that he could not come) b. He regretted it (that he could not come) c. He saw to it (that he could not come) Since the relevant pronominal is an argument and not a placeholder for an argument, it may appear in spec-IP in languages like Icelandic and German (Vikner, 1995: 226). Recall that genuine expletives are excluded from this position Second, certain languages have a semi-locative expression that is sometimes analyzed as an expletive. An example is German da ‚there™, which exists alongside the expletive es (Car- dinaletti, 1990). Da is an adverbial that does not necessarily have a locative meaning. Instead, it can have a pragmatic function, indicating that the sentence introduces new information (or, in terms of Bennis (1986), that its presupposition set is empty). This has implications for the subject: Although usually a topic, it must express new information if da is inserted. More sur- prisingly perhaps, da also affects the object. Like the subject, the object in sentences contain- ing da may in many cases not refer back to entities mentioned earlier in the discourse. This becomes apparent when such sentences are compared with sentences containing the expletive es. As an answer to the question how are things with your friend?, only (2a) is felicitous (Christine Erb and Dirk Bury, p.c.) (2) a. Es hat ihn die letzte Zeit keiner gesprochen German there has him recently no-one spoken 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 1 I I (2001) 189-233 229 b. #Da hat ihn die letzte Zeit keiner gesprochen there has him recently no-one spoken b™. #Die letzte Zeit hat ihn da keiner gesprochen. recently has him no-one spoken Expletives in other languages that allow for TECS pattern with es rather that da. So, in a sim- ilar context, the answer in (3) is felicitous in Icelandic (porbjorg Hr6arsdbttir, pc.). (3) PaZI hefur enginn s& hann, eftir pvi sem Cg best veit there has nobody seen him, after that which I best know Icelandic The fact that da affects both the subject and the object suggests that it is not a genuine exple- tive. A genuine expletive has a special relation with the subject: it marks it LF position. This presumably plays a role in explaining definiteness effects found with subjects, but it has no bearing on the definiteness of the object. The conclusion that da is an adverbial that signals an empty presupposition set is strength- ened by the following observations. To begin with, da can be combined with transitive VPs even if it is inserted below the C position (and hence within VP™s predicational domain). As we have seen, a similar string is ruled out with genuine expletives as these may not occur in spec-IP. Thus, the following contrasts can be understood if da is an adverbial: (4) a. dass da/*es jemand einen Apfel gegessen hat German that there someone an apple eaten has b. Gestem hat da/*es jemand ein Apfel gegessen yesterday has there someone an apple eaten Moreover, es and non-locative da can cooccur in colloquial German, yielding examples like the one below (Christine Erb and Dirk Bury, p.c.). If es is an expletive, da must receive some other analysis, as proposed. (5) Es hat da jemand einen Apfel gegessen there has there someone an apple eaten (colloquial) German To summarize, there are three reasons for not analyzing da as an expletive: (i) it affects both the subject and the object, (ii) it can follow a fronted verb or a complementizer as opposed to es, and (iii) it can cooccur with a genuine expletive. The analysis of da as an adverbial sug- gests a solution for the apparent existence of TECS in Dutch: (6) Er heeft iemand een appel gegeten there has someone an apple eaten Dutch Suppose that Dutch er is a genuine expletive. Then the example in (6) can only be understood if Dutch has both V2 and V to I. Although there can be no doubt that Dutch has V2, there is no evidence in favour of V to I. In fact, Dutch patterns like Afrikaans in having poor agree- ment and in allowing PP extraposition: (7) dat Jan <aan zijn vader>.denkt <aan zijn vaden that John of his father thinks of his father Dutch 230 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 If V to I does not take place, the functional domain of Dutch is too small to host TECS. This implies that we must analyze er as an adverbial signalling an empty presupposition set, on a par with German da. An analysis along these lines has been proposed earlier by Bennis (1986). Indeed er behaves like da in all relevant respects. First, like da, er does not only affect the subject but also the object of the sentence that hosts it (Bennis, 1986: 213-214). As an answer to the question how are things with your friend?, only (8a) can be used. If er is inserted, the result is unacceptable.31 (8) a. Niemand heeft ‚m de laatste tijd gezien no-one has him recently seen b. #Er heeft niemand ‚m de laatste tijd gezien there has no-one him recently seen b™. #De laatste tijd heeft er niemand ‚m gezien recently has there no-one him see Dutch Second, two occurrences of er are allowed (9). Even if one of these is analyzed as an exple- tive, at least the other must be an adverbial. (9) Er heeft er iemand een appel gegeten there has there someone an apple eaten Dutch Third, er can follow a complementizer or a fronted verb, whether or not the verb is transitive: (10) a. dat er iemand een appel gegeten heeft that there someone an apple eaten has b. Gisteren heeft er iemand een appel gegeten yesterday has there someone eaten an apple Dutch These data motivate an analysis of er as an adverbial, irrespective of one™s position on V to I in this language. We have argued that Dutch lacks V to I. As this operation is a prerequisite for the grammaticality of TECS, er cannot be an expletive on this analysis. The data in (10) lead to the same conclusion if one assumes that Dutch does have V to I. As we have seen, genuine expletives cannot be inserted in spec-IP in languages like German or Icelandic. This implies that, if er were a genuine expletive, the examples in (10) should be ungrammatical. The parallels between Dutch er and German da indicate that the former must at least be ambiguous between a genuine expletive and an adverbial signalling an empty presupposition set. However, it seems to us that the burden of proof lies on those who wish to argue for such an ambiguity. The simplest conclusion one can draw is that er is always an adverbial. Note that the definiteness effect associated with er is not a sufficient argument for an analysis as a genuine expletive, as the same effect occurs with German da. j1 An anonymous reviewer remarks that even with focal stress the examples in (8b,c) are unacceptable. At first site this may seem unexpected, given that focal stress is usually associated with new information. Note, however, that pronouns inherently refer back to entities introduced earlier in the discourse. Hence, they can bear contrastive focus (which does not imply an empty presupposition set), but not new infor- mation focus. So, the fact that the pronouns in (IOb,c) can bear focal stress does not affect the argument given in the main text. 0. Koenemun, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 231 References Ackema, Peter and Ad Neeleman, 1998. Conflict resolution in passive formation. Lingua l(2), 13-29 Ackema, Peter, Ad Neeleman and Fred Weennan, 1993. Deriving functional projections. In: NELS 23, GSLA, Amherst, 17-3 1. Alexiadou, Artemis and Elena Anagnostopoulou, 1998. Parametrizing AGR, NLLT 16,419-539. Ariel, Mira, 1990. Accessing noun-phrase antecedents. London/New York: Routledge. Auger, Julie, 1992. Francais par16 et ‚fragmentabilite™ des systemes grammaticaux. Paper presented at the XVe congres international des linguistes, Qu&ec. Barbosa, Pilar, 1996. A new look at the null subject parameter. In: J. Costa et al. (eds.), ConSOLE 4, Leiden University. Bennis, Hans, 1986. Gaps and dummies. Dordrecht: Foris. Bobaljik, Jonathan and Dianne Jonas, 1996. Subject positions and the roles of TP. Linguistic Inquiry 27, 195-236. Bobaljik, Jonathan and Hijskuldur Thrinsson, 1998. Two heads arenit always better than one. Syntax 1, 37-7 1. Borer, Hagit, 1986. I-subjects. Linguistic Inquiry 17, 375416. Brandi, Luciana and Patrizia Cordin, 1989. Two Italian dialects and the null subject parameter. In: 0. Jaeggli and K. Safir (eds.), The null subject parameter, 1 I I-142. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Brody, Michael, 1995. Lexico-logical form. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Brody, Michael, 1998. Projection and phrase structure. Linguistic Inquiry 29, 367-398. Calabrese, Andrea, 1991. Some remarks on focus and logical structures in Italian. Harvard Working Papers in Linguistics 1, 91-127. Cardinaletti, Anna, 1990. Impersonal constructions and sentential arguments in German. Padova: Uni- press. Cardinaletti, Anna, 1997. Subjects and clause structure.. In: L. Haegeman (ed.), The new comparative syntax, 00-00. Longman, London. Chierchia, Gennaro, 1995. Individual-level predicates as inherent generics. In: G. Carlson and F. Pel- Ieties (eds.), The generic book, 176-233. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Chomsky, Noam, 1981. Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris. Chomsky, Noam, 1986. Barriers. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, Noam, 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Collins, Chris and Hijskuldur Thrainsson, 1996. VP-internal structure and object shift in Icelandic. Lin- guistic Inquiry 27, 391-444. Dechaine, Rose-Marie, 1993. Predicates across categories. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Massachu- setts. Diesing, Molly, 1989. Indefinites. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Diesing, Molly, 1990. Verb movement and the subject position in Yiddish. NLLT 8, 369426. Dikken, Marcel den, 1995. Binding, expletives and levels. Linguistic Inquiry 26, 347-354. Doetjes, Jenny, Ad Neeleman and Hans van de Koot, 1999. Degree expressions. Manuscript, Utrecht University/UCL. Emonds, Joseph, 1981. Word order in generative grammar. Journal of Linguistic Research 1, 33-54. Ernst, Thomas, 1994. M-command and precedence. Linguistic Inquiry 25, 327-334. Grimshaw, Jane, 1995. Projection, heads and optimality. Linguistic Inquiry 26, 373-422. Hoekstra, Teun and RenC Mulder, 1990. Unergatives as copular verbs. TLR 7, l-79. Holmberg, Anders, 1995. The pros and cons of agreement in Scandinavian impersonals. In: G. Cinque et al. (eds.), Paths towards universal grammar, 217-236. Iatridou, Sabine, 1990. About Agr(P). Linguistic Inquiry 2 I, 55 l-577. Iatridou, Sabine and Anthony Kroch, 1992. The licensing of CP-recursion and its relevance to the Ger- manic verb second phenomenon. Working Papers in Scandinavian Syntax 50, l-24. Jackendoff, Ray, 1990. On Larson™s account of the double object construction. Linguistic Inquiry 21, 427-454. Jonas, Dianne, 1995. Clausal structure and verbal syntax of Scandinavian and English. Ph.D. disserta- tion, Harvard University. 232 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman I Lingua 111 (2001) 189-233 Jonsson, Johannes Gisli, 1996. Clausal architecture and case in Icelandic. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Massachusetts. Kayne, Richard, 1994. The antisymmetry of syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Kitagawa, Yoshihisa, 1989. Deriving and copying predication. NELS 19, 27&300. Koeneman, Olaf, 1997. On V to I movement and flexible syntax. In: T. Cambier-Langeveld et al. (eds.), ConSOLE 5, Leiden University, 183-198. Koeneman, Olaf, 2000. The flexible nature of verb movement. Ph.D. dissertation, Utrecht Institute of Linguistics, Utrecht University. Koopman, Hilda and Dominique Sportiche, 1991. The position of subjects. Lingua 85, 21 l-258. Kosmeijer, Wim, 1986. The status of the finite inflection in Icelandic and Swedish. Working Papers in Scandinavian Syntax 26, 141. Koster, Jan, 1987. Domains and dynasties. Dordrecht: Foris. Kratzer, Angelica, 1996. Severing the external argument from its verb. In: J. Rooryk and L. Zaring (eds.), Phrase structure and the lexicon, 109-138. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Kroch, Anthony, 1989. Reflexes of grammar in patterns of language change. Journal of Language Vari- ation and Change 1, 199-244. Maling, Joan, 1988. Variations on a theme. In: D. Fekete and Z. Laubitz (eds.), McGill Working Papers in Linguistics; Special Issue on Comparative Germanic Syntax, McGill University, Montreal, 168-191. Manzini, Rita, 1983. Restructuring and reanalysis. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT. Marantz, Alec, 1984. On the nature of grammatical relations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Moro, Andrea, 1997. The raising of predicates, predicative nouns and the theory of clause structure. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Muller, Claude, 1984. Liinversion du sujet clitique en francais et la syntaxe du sujet. Linguisticae Inves- tigationes 8, 9-47. Neeleman, Ad and Fred Weerman, 1999. Flexible syntax. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Partee, Barbara, 1973. Some transformational extensions of Montague grammar. Journal of Philosophi- cal Logic 2, 509-534. Pinker, Steven, 1984. Language learnability and language development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni- versity Press. Platzack, Christer, 1983. Germanic word order and the COMP/INFL parameter. Working Papers in Scandinavian Syntax 2, University of Trondheim. Platzack, Christer and Anders Holmberg, 1989. The role of AGR and finiteness. Working Papers in Scandinavian Syntax 44, 101-l 17. Ponelis, Fritz, 1977. Afrikaanse sintaksis. Goodwood: Van Schaik. Poole, Geoffrey, 1996. Optional movement in the minimalist program. In: W. Abraham et al. (eds.), Minimal ideas, 199-216. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Reinhart, Tanya, 1996. Interface strategies. OTS Working Papers, Utrecht University. Remand, Eric, 1997. Primitives of binding. Manuscript, Utrecht University/OTS. Rizzi, Luigi, 1982. Issues in Italian syntax. Dordrecht: Foris. Robbers, Karin, 1997. Non-finite verbal complements in Afrikaans: A comparative approach. Ph.D. dis- sertation, University of Amsterdam/HIL. Roberge, Yves, 1986. The syntactic recoverability of null arguments. Kingston: McGill-Queen™s Uni- versity Press. Roberts, Ian, 1993. Verbs and diachronic syntax. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Rognvaldsson, Eirfkur and Hoskuldur Thransson, 1990. On Icelandic word order once more. In: J. Mal- ing and A. Zaenen (eds.), Modern Icelandic syntax (Syntax and Semantics 24), 3-41. San Diego, CA: Academic Press. Rohrbacher, Bernhard, 1994. The Germanic languages and the full paradigm. Ph.D. dissertation, Uni- versity of Massachusetts. Ruys, Eddy, 1992. The scope of indefinites. Ph.D. dissertation, Utrecht University. Sankoff, Gillian, 1982. Usage linguistique et grammaticalisation: Les clitiques sujets en francais. In: N. Dittmar and B. Sclieben-Lange (eds.), Die Soziolinguistik in romanischsprachigen Landem. Ttlbin- gen: Narr. 0. Koeneman, A. Neeleman 1 Lingua Ill (2001) 189-233 233 Sigufisson, Halldor Armann, 1989. Verbal syntax and case in Icelandic in a comparative GB approach. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Lund. Sperber, Dan and Deirdre Wilson, 1986. Relevance. Oxford: Blackwell. Sproat, Richard, 1985. Welsh syntax and VSO structure. NLLT 3, 173-216. Steyn, Emma, 1996. Extraposition of prepositional phrases in German as a foreign language. Deutschuntetricht im Sdlichen Afrika 27.26-34. Stowell, Tim, 1981. Origins of phrase structure. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT. Taraldsen, Knut, 1978. On the NIC, vacuous application and the that-trace filter. Manuscript, MIT. Thrainsson, Hoskuldur, 1979. On complementation in Icelandic. New York: Garland. Thdnsson, Htiskuldur, 1996. On the non-universality of functional categories. In: W. Abraham et al. (eds.), Minimal ideas, O&00. Amsterdam: Benjamins. Vangsnes, Oystein Alexander, 1995. Referentiality and argument positions in Icelandic. Working Papers in Scandinavian Syntax 55.89-109. Vikner, Sten, 1990. Verb movement and the licensing of NP positions in the Germanic languages. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Geneva. Vikner, Sten, 1994. Finite verb movement in Scandinavian embedded clauses. In: N. Homstein and D. Lightfoot (eds.), Verb movement, 00-00. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Vikner, Sten, 1995. Verb movement and expletive subjects in the Germanic languages. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Walinska de Hackbeil, Hanna, 1989. Q-government, thematic government and extraction asymmetries in zero derivation. Manuscript, Centre for Mathematics and Computer Science, Amsterdam. Weerman, Fred, 1989. The V2 conspiracy. Dordrecht: Foris. Williams, Edwin, 1977. Discourse and logical form. Linguistic Inquiry 8, 101-139. Williams, Edwin, 1980. Predication. Linguistic Inquiry 11, 203-238. Williams, Edwin, 1994. Thematic structure in syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Williams, Edwin, 1997. Blocking and anaphora. Linguistic Inquiry 28, 577628. Wihschko, Martina, 1995. IDS in syntax and discourse. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Vienna. 