ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001) 63-69 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Book review Leonard M. Faltz. The Navajo Verb: A Grammar for Students and Scholars. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1998. xv+452 pp. $60.00 (library binding) / $27.95 (paper). Reviewed by Theodore B. Femald, Department of Linguistics, Swarthmore Col- lege, Swarthmore, PA 19081, USA. Athabaskan verb structure is notoriously complex. The seemingly arbitrary order- ing of verbal prefixes has lead researchers to posit a position-class template to account for them. Sapir and Hoijer (1967) propose nine prefix positions before the stem for Navajo. Young, Morgan and Midgette (1987), working out details further, posit 16 slots. (See Kari (1989) for a good overview of previous work along these lines for many different Athabaskan languages. Kari™s model has 21 prefix slots.) In The Navajo Verb, Faltz employs a simplified template as follows (p. 10): (1) outer prefixes + plural + object prefixes + inner prefixes + subject prefix + cl + stem Filling these slots are a variety of inflectional and derivational morphemes, along with others that are not productive and have fixed or nontransparent meanings. The latter are called ‚thematic™ in literature on Athabaskan languages. Each verb bears a prefix for each of its arguments, and verbs can carry substantial amounts of aspec- tual information. Complicating things further, there are several kinds of dependen- cies between nonadjacent positions. Young, Morgan, and Midgette (1992: 855-863) list a variety of these. It is often the case that a series of non-productive morphemes can be split apart by productive affixes (or in the templatic model, they appear in nonadjacent positions). For example, the stem of a verb may only have a particular meaning when it appears with particular prefixes that are not adjacent to it. To make matters more complicated Navajo morphemes frequently do not surface in the form listed in the Young, Morgan, and Midgette verb charts. They either have substantial allomorphy or they undergo a rich variety of unusual phonological processes (Kari, 1976). The phonological processes of Navajo also are restricted to particular domains of application within the verb complex. See Rice (2000) for a detailed discussion of the theoretical issues and their historical development in mor- phological work on the Athabaskan languages. 037%2166/01/$ - see front matter 0 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00022-X 64 Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 63-69 In the preface to The Navajo Verb, Faltz acknowledges a heavy debt to the life work of Robert Young and William Morgan, Sr. Young and Morgan, 1987 (here- after, YM) and Young, Morgan and Midgette, 1992 (hereafter YMM) are rich refer- ence works on Navajo, but a good deal of time is required for a scholar to discern the structure of the language from them. Faltz™s book in no way is designed to supplant them. (Indeed, later chapters assume the reader has access to YM.) Instead, it can be seen as an attempt to explain them to the student of Navajo and the language scholar. Faltz writes, ‚Students wanting to learn to speak Navajo or scholars wanting infor- mation about the grammatical system of the language are often so daunted by the profusion of forms (and the fact that different verbs often exhibit very different forms) that they become discouraged. Textbooks of the language are not much help: they deal with the verbs by providing paradigm charts while shying away from describing the grammatical system of the verb in an adequate way™ (p. x). The presentation of the book is quite different from previous work on the Navajo verb (including Young™s most recent explanation of the Navajo verb (Young, 2000)). Faltz writes, ‚My intent in this book was to present the material in such a way that the overall structure of the system emerges naturally as the book progresses, so that the reader always has a clear notion of how the parts of the system fit together™ (p.x). Thus, the system is presented incrementally, ‚starting with the most fundamental parts of the system and gradually adding on the more complex parts™ (p. x). This book consists of 27 chapters, beginning with the sounds of Navajo, and working through verb structures of increasing complexity. Faltz begins with simple intransitive, imperfective verbs and gradually adds complexity. Faltz builds the explanation with the reader, issuing promissory notes here, reminding the reader of what remains to be explained there. Frequently, a rule is first formulated as an approximation that will handle the verb forms presented up to the point at which the generalization is introduced. Later the rule is revised in response to more compli- cated data subsequently encountered. Consistent with this, the organization of the book appears somewhat haphazard. One does not know what to expect next; one is simply along for the ride. And it is a marvelous ride. After one reads the book, it is clear that certain subject matter had to be introduced before other material could be attempted. This, then, is the rationale for the organization. The book concludes with three appendices. The first appendix lists the rules that were developed in the text along with references to the chapters in which they were developed. The second shows the subject prefix charts (items like example (4) below) for all the modes in the grammar. The third appendix lists the vocabulary principles like the one shown below in (5). The appendices become very important in later chapters to help the reader follow the analysis of more complicated verbs. A brief bibliography of fairly non-technical literature is included. Following this is an index of Navajo verb bases, an index of the English verbs that correspond to the Navajo verb bases, a short verb theme index, and finally a nicely organized subject index. Faltz™s writing style is informal, but this is not a book for casual reading. Faltz™s tone is that of a lecturer talking to a large class of under-prepared undergraduates. He often poses questions and answers them immediately as if the students are only Book review I Lingua Ill (2001) 63-69 65 somewhat attentive: (‚Why isn™t there an object prefix in this form? Answer: since the subject is 2 person, Rule Str-1 says that a 3 person object is represented by zero™ (p. 47)). There are no prerequisites for this course, and the beginning is so non-tech- nical that one initially has the feeling that one can pass the course without really try- ing. The book assumes little or no familiarity with terminology from linguistics or even traditional grammar, defining such terms as verb, transitive, and intransitive in the first chapter. This characteristic is both a strength and a drawback. The non-tech- nical nature of the book will make it accessible to anyone willing to work through it, but linguists are likely to find the going a bit slow early on. However, the straight- forward prose can be deceptive: the material itself is very complex (with 28 intricate morpho-phonological rules, 21 of which apply within one of 3 morphological domains.) Despite the clarity of exposition, readers must work hard to keep phono- logical rules and domains straight. Failing to do this will result in the reader having difficulty following the discussion of many of the more interesting aspects of the verb structure. This complexity, of course, is due entirely to the complexity of the phenomena rather than to anything that can be blamed on the author. In using the book, it is wise to get in the habit of stopping as soon as a question is posed, before the author answers it, to make sure one can answer it oneself. Those who are lulled to sleep by the light prose will be clobbered by the awesome complexity of the sub- ject matter, and will be poised to fail the midterm examination by the tenth chapter. As an example of how Faltz™s system works, consider the following verb forms (p. 76): (2) sg dpl distr pl 1 nisis™na™ ™ ‚.™ msii na™ nidasii™na™ 2 nisini™na™ nisooh™na™ nidasooh™na™ 3 naas™na™ nidaas™na™ 4 . . . ) nijis na™ nidajis™na™ These are the Perfective forms of verbs meaning ‚crawl around™, shown for first, sec- ond, third, and fourth person for singular, dual, and (distributed) plural. These forms have a common verb base, which consists of the information shown in (3) (p. 76). 0: nk%h Perfective: s-P The stem set is a list of forms that the stem of the verb will take when it appears in various modes. These modes are abbreviated with I for Imperfective, P for Perfec- tive, F for Future, R for Iterative, and 0 for Optative. There are two additional modes, Usitative and Progressive, but their forms can be predicted from the other 66 Book review I Lingua I1 1 (2001) 63-69 stem forms, so they do not need to be listed. The verb base in (3) contains the infor- mation that a speaker of Navajo must commit to memory in order to form the verbs in (2). Notice how the nonadjacent phenomena mentioned above are dealt with here. In addition to the stem, the so-called classifier is specified, along with the require- ment that the outer prefix IZQ appear, and that the conjugation pattern s-P be used in Perfective forms. In addition to specifications of verb base, Faltz specifies the forms of the subject prefixes that appear with each mode. Faltz thus departs from the analysis of YMM which employs a constant form of each subject prefix for any mode, and which also employs mode markers as independent prefixes. In Faltz™s analysis, as he points out, the mode of the verb is made evident by the stem and the subject prefix, and there is a clear dependency between subject marking and mode, but object marking is inde- pendent of mode (p. xi). A result of this treatment is also that fewer morpho-phono- logical rules are needed since forms that more closely resemble the surface appear- ance are posited as basic. Below is an example of the subject-mode forms needed to produce (2). These forms are required by the verb base in (3) since the base stipu- lates that its classifier is d and it uses the s-Perfective (p. 74): (4) s-P subject prefixes, plain-l/d classifiers : % W 1 sis siid 2 sini sooh 3 S The forms in (2) can now be derived from (3) and (4) by mapping their contents onto the template in (l), and by applying two rules of phonology. One is the d-effect rule, a consonant mutation commonly posited in work on Athabaskan languages (see, e.g., Kari 1976, McDonough 1990). This rule is responsible for the glottalization at the beginning of the final syllable in the forms in (2). The other rule changes the outer na prefix to ni. This rule is called Disj-3 and is, shown below in (7). The represen- tations in (3) and (4) are the basic building blocks of verbs in Faltz™s analysis. Faltz posits one other kind of rule for building vocabulary. Below is an example (p. 206): (5) Vocabulary 1: If you have a verb theme whose meaning involves motion, you can build a verb base whose meaning involves motion that goes around ran- domly as well as round-trip motion by constructing that verb base as follows: I - Stem set: use the continuative Classifier: use the classifier of the verb theme stem-set of the verb theme Lexical prefixes: na (outer) Transitivity: use the transitivity of the verb theme Perfective : s-P Book review I Lingua I1 1 (2001) 63-69 67 The verb theme for Navajo motion verbs are classificatory in the sense that a stem set is selected according to the physical properties of the entity in motion. Vocabu- lary rule 1 can be used to build complete verbs with any of these classificatory stem sets. The underlying analysis of this book is essentially that of Young, Morgan, and Midgette (1992), but Faltz presents the system in a way that allows the reader to actually calculate the correct form of nearly any verb. The aim of the book, then, is pedagogical rather than an attempt to advance a particular theory of morphology. For the theoretical implications of this book, see the provocative discussions of Faltz (1999) and Faltz, (forthcoming), which use a deep familiarity with the facts of Navajo to consider what sorts of structure a lexicon can have using a unification- based theory. Phonologists will not find that Faltz™s rules are theoretically satisfying, but they are not intended to be; they are simply designed to get the facts right. Some of these can be seen as pre-theoretical descriptive generalizations (p. 408): (6) Rule str-5: (a) (A MOVEMENT rule:) If the 4 person subject prefix j (in object position) is preceeded by another prefix and followed directly by the long-vowel-F prefix, then the long-vowel-F prefix and j interchange positions. (b) If the 3 person object prefix y is preceded by another prefix and followed directly by the long-vowel-F y prefix, then the two y prefixes merge and become one y. These are really two rules, of course, one appearing to be metathesis and one a con- sonant merger. Faltz clearly believes that it is more perspicuous to describe the rele- vant phenomena using these heavily conditioned phonological rules rather than ana- lyzing them in some other way. Surely phonologists would attempt to explain what is going on in (b) as an instance of a more general process applying perhaps to larger morphological units than Faltz assumes, and they would try to explain away (a) entirely. But to develop any such accounts, a meticulous description of the facts would be necessary, and Faltz, together with YM and YMM are the places to look. The rule in (6) is fairly straightforward compared to Rule Disj-3, a piece of which was needed to derive the correct forms in (2) (pp. 413-414): (7) Rule Disj-3: The syllable na becomes ni, and the syllable nii becomes ni, if it is immediately followed by: the j which indicates 4 person (Chapter 5) the distributive plural prefix da (Chapter 5) an s-P subject prefix other than the 3 person prefixes z or s (Chapter 8) the F mode d (Chapter 14) or any inner prefix beginning with d (Chapter 21) a cluster of consonants consisting of zh or ‚or zh™ followed directly by the F mode d (Chapter 14) or by any inner prefix beginning with d (Chapter 21) 68 Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 63-69 (f) the semeliterative prefix n&5 or n%hl, or any prefix of the form nB (Chap- ter 22) (g) an s-1 subject prefix other than the 3 person zero prefix (Chapter 27) Special note: If there is a sequence of prefixes each of the form na or nh, and if the last one is in a position to change into ni or ni according to this rule, then the last prefix does not change, but all the other prefixes in this sequence to its left do change. (Incidentally, if there is a sequence like this, the last prefix in the sequence will end up being nh. The prefix na (with low tone) is never preceded by another na or nh.) This rule is indicative of the challenges that face the language student and the theo- rist when he or she attempts to deal with Navajo verb structure. The careful detail is impressive. The lack of generalization should be enticing to phonologists and mor- phologists. The chapter numbers given with each line of the rule reveal well the incremental approach Faltz adopted in presenting his system. In conclusion, The iVuvujo Verb is a most welcome contribution to the literature on the Athabaskan languages. The approach Faltz takes is the best effort to date to teach students how to build Navajo verbs. The presentation is formal enough so one can work through exactly what is going on without making the material too opaque. None of this means that the subject matter of the book is easy to learn. From the samples of the rules Faltz employs it should be clear that diligent study of this book is required to actually develop the ability to calculate Navajo verb forms. However, a passing understanding of the verb structure and the issues it presents can be gotten by a more casual reading. Faltz suggests that this book can profitably be used as an adjunct text in a course in the Navajo language. He points out that it should not be the primary text for such a course (it makes no attempt to cover the vocabulary or conversational dialogues covered in standard language course texts), but it does convey the organization of the lexicon in a way that ordinary language texts do not, and it tackles the structure of the verb - all too often ignored in Navajo language text books. References Faltz, Leonard, forthcoming. Some notes on derivational relationships among Navajo Verbs. Papers in honor of Ken Hale. Cambridge, MA: MIT Working Papers in Linguistics. Faltz, Leonard, 1999. The structure of a lexicon: Navajo (and other) Verbs. paper presented at the West Coast Conference on Linguistics. Kari, James, 1976. Navajo verb prefix phonology. New York: Garland. Kari, James, 1989. Affix positions and zones in the Athapaskan Verb Complex: Ahtna and Navajo. International Journal of American Linguistics 55: 424-454. McDonough, Joyce M., 1990. Topics in the phonology and morphology of Navajo Verbs. Doctoral dis- sertation, University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Reproduced by GLSA. Rice, Keren, 2000. Morpheme order and semantic scope: Word formation in the Athapaskan Verb (Cambridge Studies in Linguistics, 90). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Sapir, Edward and Harry Hoijer, 1967. The phonology and morphology of the Navaho Language. Uni- versity of California Publications in Linguistics 50. Book review 1 Lingua 111 (2001) 6349 69 Young, Robert W., 2000. Navajo verb morphology: An overview. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. Young, Robert W. and William Morgan, Sr., 1987. The Navajo language: A grammar and colloquial dictionary. (Second edition). Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. Young, Robert W., William Morgan, Sr. and Sally Midgette, 1992. Analytical lexicon of Navajo. Albu- querque: University of New Mexico Press. 