ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001) 1-28 www.elsevier.nl/locate/hngua Prepositions and the lexical/functional divide : Aphasic evidence* Karen Fraud* Department of Phonetics and Linguistics, University College London, Cower Street, London WClE 6BT, UK Received 9 May 2000; revised version 18 July 2000 Abstract Prepositions occupy a precarious position in syntactic theories which make use of a lexi- cal/functional dichotomy, since they are neither lexical nor functional, at least with regard to existing definitions and criteria. This paper examines data from MC, an aphasic patient who demonstrates an extremely robust dissociation between lexical and functional categories. MC is extremely poor at reading functional categories but his reading of substantives is relatively unimpaired, and he therefore provides a testing ground to help decide whether prepositions are underlyingly represented as lexical or functional. On testing, MC shows that he treats prepositions exactly as if they are functional. Attempts to explain this pattern of performance show that MC™s deficit cannot be captured along semantic lines, but appears to be syntactic in nature. This leads to a reconsideration of the nature of functional categories: perhaps they are represented in an entirely different way to substantives, perhaps even in a different lexi- con (a UG lexicon) which is innately prespecified for syntactic information. 0 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. Keywords: Prepositions; Aphasia; Functional categories * Special thanks are due to MC, for all his hard work and patience, and to Neil Smith, for many inter- esting and valuable discussions, and for his never-failing support. I would also like to thank Judit Druks and Misi Brody for reading drafts and being generous with their time and ideas, and Eric Mathieu and Phoevos Panagiotidis for many interesting discussions. I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer for per- ceptive and helpful comments on an earlier draft. This research was carried out as part of my Ph.D., which is funded by the Arts and Humanities Research Board of the British Academy. * Phone: +44 20 7679 7172; Fax: +44 20 7383 4108; E-mail: k.froud@ucI.ac.uk 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter 0 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00026-7 2 K. Froud I Lingua 111 (2001) 1-28 1. Introduction The notion of lexical versus functional categories has been carried over into mod- ern syntactic theory from traditional approaches to grammar, and whilst it retains some empirical and intuitive utility - for example in the desc~ption of psycholin- guistic data and neurolinguistic deficits - it has remained unders~ci~ed in current syntactic theory. This presents a serious dif~culty, especially when we consider the data obtained from ~vestigations of agr~matic aphasia, because one of the defining characteristics of this disorder is standardly assumed to be a deficit affecting ‚function words™ (e.g. Alajouanine, 1968; Tissot et al., 1973; Caplan, 1985; Howard, 1985; Marshall, 1986; Grodzinsky, 1990 and many others). The underspecification of the distinction between lexical and functional categories is particularly pronounced in the case of prepositions, which apparently occupy an indeterminate position within this dichotomy, yet which are frequently used as experimental stimuli in investigations of various acquired language deficits and cited as diagnostic evidence in descriptions of the same (e.g. Schwartz et al., 1980; Berndt, 1987; Grodzinsky, 1988; Miceli et al., 1989; Biassou et al., 1997 - see below for some further discussion). This paper aims to consider the notion of ‚functional category™ with reference to investigations of aphasic deficits. In particular, I hope to shed some light on the problematic nature of prepositions, referring to experimental data obtained from investigations of a particular aphasic patient, MC, which seem to call for a recasting of the problem. MC has multiple aphasic deficits, but he provides an unusual oppor- tunity to increase understanding of the apparently hybrid lexical/functional nature of prepositions because of the unusually pure patterns of performance he demonstrates in single word reading tasks with respect to lexical versus functional categories. He is totally unable to read any functional items, including determiners, complementis- ers, qu~ti~ers, in~ectional elements, wh- words, pronouns, negation and conjunc- tions. This deficit dissociates strongly from his relatively intact ability to read sub- stantive categories, even those which are of low frequency and/or imageability, and from his spont~eous speech, in which he is able to use many functional categories approp~ately and without hesitation. It has also been possible to demonstrate, to some degree, that MC™s comprehension of functional categories is intact (e.g. Druks and Froud, submitted; Froud, 1998); so even though he is unable to read them, he does recognise them and he understands what they mean. This is not to imply that MC™s difficulties are limited to the reading modality, however; he is not only dyslexic, and his morphological and function word deficits have complex effects on his language performance in all modalities.™ In fact, it is ™ In fact, MC™s language is most severely affected in the written modality, His hemiplegia means that he has to write with his non-preferred left hand, which adds difficulty; but even so, his written output is usually unintelligible, consisting of word-length strings of letters which rarely bear any resemblance to the target and which do not appear to reflect phonotactic or orthographic constraints. Occasionally he produces a real word, and he is invariably pleased by this, even when the word does not correspond to the target (which it usually does not). He maintains written correspondence by discussing what he wants to say with his assistant, who then writes out a letter for him which he copies. Further investigations of MC™s writing deficits are pending. K. Froud 1 Lingua I1 1 (2001) 1-28 3 hypothesised (Froud, in preparation) that MC suffers from a deficit at the level of an independent morphological component of the grammar, which acts as an interface between the lexicon and the syntax (the existence of such a level of representation is also proposed by Smith and Tsimpli, 1995 and Tsimpli, 1996). A discussion of the full implications of this proposal is beyond the scope of the present paper, but to summarise, such a deficit is hypothesised to lead to morphological errors on sub- stantives and to distinct effects on function words, which are claimed to be sepa- rately represented from substantives and to only be fully realised (in terms of their featural specification) at the morphology interface with syntax. MC™s production of function words is supported by the intact availability of lexical information about substantive categories, including their extended projections (Grimshaw, 1991), and this means that he is better at producing function words in a sentential context - as in reading of connected text, or in spontaneous speech - than in isolation. Meaning representations of functors and substantives alike are hypothesised to remain intact, accounting for MC™s comparatively good comprehension of function words that he cannot read. The present paper concentrates on MC™s single word reading because this has been found to be the most effective way to force the production of function words in isolation; removal of the syntactic frame in which function words are more usually located means that the support mechanism which (by hypothesis) facilitates their production for MC is also removed, and it is possible to investigate more closely the problems manifested in their production. In addition to the striking features of MC™s deficit outlined above, the errors he makes when reading functional categories are distinct from errors he makes on other categories (which tend to be visual, phonological, or (primarily) morphological in nature): he substitutes another functional item for the target word, which he never does for any other category. At this point it seems useful to clarify that, in my view, traditional diagnostic cat- egories have little theoretical significance. Specifically, agrammatism is simply a language disorder, manifest in one or more modalities, which can be explained as resulting from some (morpho)syntactic (not semantic or phonological) deficit. On this definition, MC is agrammatic; his disorder is most clearly apparent when he is reading words in isolation, but other modalities are also affected. The interactions between his deficit and other, apparently intact, components of the language system, as well as his extra-linguistic knowledge, mean that he is able to understand spoken language very well, and his spoken output contains a much wider range of gram- matical structures and functional categories than would be expected in a classical Broca™s-type aphasic; nevertheless, he has great difficulty with certain constructions, rarely producing a passive or a wh-question, for instance (in spontaneous speech or in elicitation tasks). This can be readily accounted for on a view of a deficit at the morphological interface, as briefly outlined above. MC™s comprehension can also be shown to break down along similar lines; although functionally he manages well, on testing (using PALPA - Kay et al., 1992) he shows difficulties with certain con- structions, notably reversible passives. Again, this may be accounted for as a syn- tactic and interpretive result of a deficit at the level of the morphological interface. However, the modality in which MC™s impairment is most striking is reading of 4 K. Froud I Lingua 111 (2001) l-28 Table 1 Examples of MC™s reading errors Target MC™s response Type of error mortgage prove earn happy aunt circuit 
subtle 
lever daze motor hear whether that all some any the this You yourself I him then 
can 
could have because and ‚mortgages™ ‚proven™ ‚earnings™ ‚happiness™ ‚auntie™ ‚circus™ 
‚substitute™ 
‚levity™ 
‚haze™ 
‚Cd 
‚listen™ ‚before or because™ ‚after, I don™t know™ ‚for™ ‚after™ ‚because™ ‚at™ ‚for or to™ ‚before™ ‚after or nobody™ ‚one . . . no, because, or and™ ‚and . before™ ‚before™ ‚because™ 
beforeﬂ™ ‚it is . . . about?™ ‚after™ ‚because™ morphological (inflectional) morphological (inflectional) morphological (inflectional and derivational) morphological (derivational) morphological (derivational) visual visual visual visual semantic semantic function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution function word substitution single words. In his speech he uses functional categories, usually accurately and appropriately; but in single word reading tasks he is unable to produce function words accurately (though there is evidence that he understands them).2 MC™s lan- guage appears to have broken down along syntactic lines; he demonstrates a strong dissociation between functional categories - all functional categories, all the time - and substantives, which is most apparent in reading single words. Such a strong dis- sociation is not always apparent in cases of acquired dyslexia and/or agrammatism. Although many patients do show dissociations between functional categories and substantives, the distinction is rarely as robust as that demonstrated by MC; and in 2 MC™s reading of phrases and connected text is briefly mentioned below (section 3.3 and footnote 12); it has not been systematically investigated because the factors which appear to influence his performance on such tasks are not all linguistic, and interact in very complex ways. Single word reading tasks yield the clearest data. K. Froud I Lingua 111 (2001) 1-28 5 addition, far fewer data are provided as evidence of a particular reading perfor- mance. Consider a few cases of reported open/closed class distinctions in reading tasks. Friederici and Schoenle (1980) report the case of JL, who had greater difficulty read- ing ‚closed class™ than ‚open class™ words, making 82.35% errors on closed class words. However, 52.94% of these were failures to respond; and it is not clear exactly how many function words JL was presented with. Biassou et al. (1997) report the reading performance of three Broca™s aphasics on closed and open class words in isolation and in sentence contexts; they claim to have found that their patients had greater difficulty in reading closed class words than open class words, and that this result was more pronounced when reading words in sentences (62-94% errors on closed class words reported) than in isolation (50-75% errors on closed class words reported). But their list of closed class words is very short, and not clearly representative of functional categories, consisting as it did of 3 adverbs, 7 prepositions, 5 pronouns and a conjunction. Whether any of the patients showed greater difficulties with particular classes of function words is not mentioned. There are similarly only sixteen sentences, which include a wide variety of function words and syntactic configurations; the possibility that this complexity may have had an effect on reading is not discussed. Patterson (1982) provides detailed and rather more extensive information about the function word reading deficit of her patient, AM; he made 22-30% errors over several function word reading lists, and also had some difficulties on tasks designed to test the comprehension of written function words. Morton and Patterson (1980) likewise produce a detailed and careful analysis of the function word reading deficit of their patient PW, who read only 23% of function words correctly over many read- ing lists (a total of 406 words were presented to him). But compare the results from MC™s reading of function words, even to the two careful studies mentioned latterly; from a corpus of many (though not all) of his single word reading responses, it was found that out of 684 occasions of reading function words, he made 546 (79.82%) of his characteristic function word substitution errors, getting only 83 correct (12.13%) and either failing to respond or producing an unrelated substantive in the other cases. MC™s reading of substantives dissociates strongly from this; across many different reading lists, his reading of substantives (nouns, verbs and adjectives) was 84.31% correct (661 words read correctly out of a possible 784). Most of his errors on sub- stantives are errors of affixation. These data provide a stronger case for a func- tional/substantive dissociation than most of those reported in the literature, both in terms of the strength of the dissociation and of the numbers involved. In common with many other cases of function word deficit, MC™s difficulties extend to prepositions. 3 Although the inclusion of prepositions in the class of ‚func- tional categories™ employed by many researchers in aphasiology usually goes ™ Though it should be noted that the errors made by aphasic patients on various word classes are frequently not documented in sufficient detail to make independent analysis of these errors possible. Aphasic errors on prepositions tend to be subsumed under the relatively undefined notion of ‚function word errors™. For example, see Saffran et al. (1980); Bemdt (1987); Biassou et al., (1997) and others. 6 K. Fraud I Lingua I1 1 (2001) 1-28 unquestioned, the assumption that prepositions are functional in nature is not unproblematic. Accounts of aphasic deficits which show that prepositional elements are included in the class of items damaged in nonfluent aphasia have typically either ignored the problems or have attempted to explain the pattern of performance with recourse to notions from current syntactic theory. Examples of the former approach, in particular, proliferate, and there is not space here for a comprehensive review. The paper mentioned above, by Biassou et al. (1997), is a case in point: the stimuli presented to the patients in whom Biassou et al. were trying to demonstrate a lexical/functional distinction were controlled for fre- quency, number of phonemes and syllable structure, to achieve a maximal matching between the ‚closed class™ and ‚open class™ test items; but, curiously, they did not control for word class - prepositions were included in the mixed bag of ‚closed class items™. Consider also the following instances, chosen from the neuropsychology lit- erature almost at random. Bemdt (1987) presents an overview of the characteristics of spontaneous speech in several different aphasic patients. The two she describes as ‚severe nonfluent™ are characterised as producing more nouns than pronouns, omit- ting determiners, not producing any prepositions and omitting verbal inflections and auxiliaries - suggesting that preposition omission is as characteristic of nonfluent aphasic language production as the omission of inflectional morphology, but not at any point pausing to consider why this should be so, given the ambiguous nature of prepositional elements. Schwartz et al. (1980) used reversible locative sentences (such as The square is under the circle) in a comprehension task for agrammatic aphasics; the use of sentences which contained prepositional phrases was actually introduced to control for possible pragmatic biases on their reversible sentences which did not contain locatives. No reference is made to the fact that prepositions themselves may introduce new and more relevant (because syntactic) variables. Miceli et al. (1989) document the omission and substitution errors of a large group of agrammatic aphasic patients on functional categories in spontaneous speech; prepositions are reported as absent or substituted at least as often as other categories such as articles, clitics and auxiliaries, but no comment as to their ambiguously lex- ical/functional status is made. In their protocol for the analysis of agrammatic pro- duction, Saffran et al. (1989) instruct that the number of closed class words in a sam- ple be calculated (rather than counted) by subtracting the number of substantives (which does not include prepositions) from the total number of words in the sample - so the kind of closed class words present in a speech sample are never analysed, despite the obvious relevance of such analysis for agrammatic aphasia. And there are many other, similar, examples of studies which purport to examine functional cate- gories or closed class words, but which in fact gloss over any such analysis. In the face, then, of overwhelming empirical evidence that prepositions pattern with other functional elements in aphasia, coupled with the lack of a fully articulated account of the syntactic nature of prepositions, and a general acceptance that the underlying deficit in nonfluent aphasia is somehow syntactically defined, it seems clear that some recourse to syntactic theory is required to advance the search for an explanatory account of such deficits. Nevertheless, attempts to provide a syntactic explanation for the preposition deficit in nonfluent aphasia are still rare and have not K. Froud I Lingua 1 I1 (2001) 1-28 7 on the whole been particularly successful. For example, Grodzinsky (1988) attempted to account for the selective deficit affecting certain prepositions in agram- matism by invoking the notion of government, and suggesting that only governed prepositions, such as those in lexical passives (‚John is interested in Mary™) or those which are subcategorised by V (‚John is counting 011 Mary™) are damaged; ungoverned prepositions (such as by in a syntactic passive, analysed by Grodzinsky as adjoined to the S node) are spared. Grodzinsky claims to find results which sup- port his hypothesis; however, other researchers have found differing patterns of performance (e.g. Tesak and Hummer, 1994 found that there was no governed/ ungoverned distinction made as regards prepositions in the spoken output of Broca™s aphasics); and Grodzinsky™s account is in any case conceptually undesirable, since it requires the existence of a selective deficit of government pertaining to only one cat- egory - P - which is a separate deficit from that assumed to have an effect on the other damaged categories in the syntactic representations of the agrammatic sub- jects.4 I return briefly to this issue below (see end of section 3.4). So far I have been presenting a brief overview of existing approaches in neu- ropsychological frameworks to the lexical/functional distinction. Before I can begin to present a syntactic perspective on this problem, it is necessary for me to clarify some terminology. A major criticism of neuropsychological approaches to function word deficits in aphasia is that the notion of ‚function word™ or ‚functional category™ is not defined, and up to now I have been using these terms rather loosely. From this point, I shall use the term ‚f(unctional)-head™ to mean any syntactic head other than the major (or substantive) categories of N, V and A(dj). This includes certain items that may not be counted as ‚function words™ (assuming a rather intuitive, even ortho- graphic, definition of ‚word™) - for instance, certain null operators or cliticised ele- ments - and it excludes certain items that may be functional in some respects but which appear to be specifiers or adjuncts - such as modifiers or adverbial elements. This notion of f-head seems to capture the class of items that MC is unable to read (for instance: D, C, Aux, Q, Wh, P, Conj, Neg). In addition, because the definition of f-head given here includes such items as null or covert operators, we can predict that substantives which may be associated with operator-headed constructions are likely to be more difficult for MC to read - for instance, unaccusative verbs (which may be associated with an operator that ‚absorbs™ the internal theta-role of the verb, forcing movement of the object to a higher position - see Froud, 1998 for a prelim- inary version of this idea and how it relates to MC™s performance in unaccusative verb reading tasks). I shall reserve the term ‚functional categories™ for discussion of traditional definitions of the lexical/functional divide, or to refer to the intuitive notion of functionality which is current in the aphasia literature. The proposed nature of the main deficit is not specified by Grodzinsky in this particular paper, but one would assume that it is related to his famous trace deletion hypothesis (laid out most explicitly in Grodzinsky, 1990) - clearly not a proposal with any explanatory power as far as the preposition problem is concerned, since there ate generally no traces to be. deleted from the syntactic representation of prepo- sitions; hence the need to propose a second, entirely separate, deficit to capture the fact that prepositions appear to pattern with other, damaged, functional categories in agrammatic aphasia. 8 K. Froud I Lingua 111 (2001) 1-28 This paper is organised as follows. First, I shall consider some of the attempts to characterise functional categories within the syntactic frameworks of Government and Binding (GB) theory (Chomsky, 1981) and the more recent minimalist frame- work (Chomsky, 1993, 1995) and I shall consider how prepositions fit (or rather, fail to fit) into these frameworks. I shall then present a theoretically motivated read- ing task which was designed for MC, and discuss how the results of this investiga- tion could provide some support for a reanalysis of the lexical/functional dichotomy. The idea is that, as Uriagereka (1998: 454) puts it: ﬁ[There is] a distinction between standard lexical items and grammatical functional items. Language has a fixed, very limited set of the latter. Suppose that the split between lexical and functional items means that they™re not even part of the same mental stock . ..ﬁ. A consideration of what it could mean for so-called functional items to be part of an entirely different ‚mental stock™ from lexical items leads to a re-evaluation of the prepositions prob- lem, and a tentative solution is outlined. Finally, some of the implications of the new approach I propose are briefly considered. 2. Prepositions and the definition of ‚functional categories™ 2.1. The closed/open class distinction As Hoekstra (1995) points out, we have as yet very little idea of a theory of func- tional categories. Nevertheless, there have been various attempts to produce lists of criteria by which functional categories may be identified. One such criterion which has recurred many times in the literature is that functional categories are typically closed class (e.g. Emonds, 1985); that is, it is very difficult (if not impossible) to coin a new functional category, whereas the addition of new substantives to the lex- icon of a language is commonplace. On this criterion, and at first sight, P would appear to be a functional category. However, it seems that prepositions are not really closed class; that they appear to be so may simply be an artefact of the limited set of temporal, spatial and grammatical5 relationships that they encode. However, it is also the case that prepositions are not really open class in the fully productive sense exemplified by the major lexical classes N, V and Adj. It has been pointed out (Kortmann and Konig, 1992) that new prepositions are frequently the result of cate- gorial reanalysis, often of verbs but also of nouns, adjectives and adverbs; and in addition, it seems that a novel verb, noun or adjective is likely to be more easily assigned some kind of interpretation than a novel preposition, as in the following examples (see Jackendoff, 1990, for similar comments). (1) I hoofled it into town and bought some horribly mankacious yaffles. 5 Here I am thinking of English prepositions like of in constructions such as a bottle of wine, where the preposition serves merely to assign case to the embedded nominal; or by in the English passive, which assigns case and a theta role to the derived subject (which cannot receive case or a theta role from the verb because these are absorbed by the passive morpheme on V - e.g. Jaeggli, 1986). K. Froud I Lingua III (2001) 1-28 (2) I think we need a discussion anen@ the agenda from yesterday™s meeting. 2.2. The conceptuallprocedural distinction It has also been suggested that the distinction between conceptual and procedural meaning may be relevant for the purposes of identifying grammatical natural classes, and understanding their behaviour.™ For instance, using evidence from code-switch- ing, Chan (1999) shows that, on the one hand, P patterns with functional categories like C, D and I because it determines the position in which its code-switched com- plement may appear - so the complement of P in English must appear after P, even when that complement is codeswitched into Japanese or Korean (both languages in which the complement of P would normally precede P). On the other hand, P behaves like the major lexical categories V, N and A, because the complement of P may be an extended projection which does not exist in the language of the P itself: for example, English P can take a codeswitched Cantonese DemP complement, even though DemP is assumed to be a projection that is not available in English. So P apparently falls again somewhere between the lexical/functional divide, which leads Chan to suggest that the familiar closed/open class distinction may interact with the conceptual/procedural distinction. For example, there may be closed class concep- tual items (P - which behaves like a functional category because it is closed class, but like a lexical category because it is conceptual), open class conceptual items (N, V, A), and closed class procedural items (such as pronouns, and most other func- tional categories). Two main problems with this account come to mind. First, as I have suggested, prepositions are probably not closed class. Because Chan is relying on the closed- class nature of P to account for its patterning with the functional categories C, D and I in his data, this creates a real problem for his account. Also, prepositions are not all conceptual - some prepositions exist only to encode grammatical relationships (see footnote 5) and they carry no representational content. This is not accounted for if P is treated as a unitary grammatical class.8 So, prepositions are neither closed class nor fully open; neither conceptual nor procedural. Yet they must be somehow represented as a unitary category, if we are to account for their uniform treatment in data from codeswitching, like those reported by Chan, and from aphasic breakdown, like the data I have mentioned above and those discussed below. (For a similar claim, based on different evidence, see Giorgi, 199 1.) 6 Thanks to Neil Smith for this example. The novel word anent - roughly equivalent to with respect ro - is present in some dialects of English. ™ Conceptual meaning is representational, whereas procedural meaning issues the language faculty with instructions which restrict the ways in which utterances can be interpreted (Blakemore, 1937). s Prepositions which are not conceptual would presumably not be open class; but then Chan must have two kinds of prepositions: closed class, procedural ones and open class, conceptual ones (which puts prepositions back squarely on both sides of the lexical/functional divide). His account actually proposes only one type of preposition, which is closed class and conceptual - and it is this which I am suggesting cannot be maintained on present understanding of the properties of prepositions. 10 K. Froud I Lingua 111 (2001) 1-28 2.3. A phonological criterion Functional categories have also been defined in terms of prosody; they seem to be items which do not receive phonological stress in a sentence. This notion has even been the basis for one of the earliest linguistic approaches to agrammatic aphasia; Kean (1977) suggested that agrammatics do not perceive or use unstressed items, and that such a deficit would affect primarily functional items. Later research made it clear that unstressed items are indeed perceived by agrammatic aphasics, and Kean™s hypothesis was rejected. In addition, it seems that some items which are problematic in agrammatism can in fact receive stress - contrastive or primary - in an utterance, including prepositions. For example: (3) I™m not AT the office on Wednesdays. (4) You can make a mess OUTSIDE the house (not inside). (5) That drink isn™t FOR you. 2.4. Reduced semanticity A typical response to a functional category deficit in the aphasia literature is to assume that the deficit has affected those categories with impoverished semantic rep- resentations. For example, Friedman (1995) assumes that the representations of func- tional categories in the lexicon are associated with very little meaning (ﬁwords with less densely interrelated associative networksﬂ - 1995: 198), and she even suggests that functional categories are read (and produced) via the same processes of grapheme-phoneme conversion that permit the reading of pseudowords and unfamil- iar real words (which are also unsupported by a full semantic representation). This is clearly a problem for spatial and temporal prepositions, which have rich meaning rep- resentations and would therefore be expected to be available via Friedman™s ‚seman- tic lexicon™ even if an aphasic patient is unable to access them via the grapheme- phoneme conversion processes which Friedman suggests underpin the lexical access of functional categories in the undamaged brain. But, even more unfortunately for such a view, it is predicted on Friedman™s account that any aphasic patient who has a pseudoword reading deficit would also have a functional category reading deficit, since the implicated route is used for both types of stimulus; but this pattern of per- formance is rarely attested. In the case of MC, who in fact does have a deficit in both these types of reading task, the evidence that he does not use the same route for read- ing both pseudowords and functional categories is very strong; when presented with a pseudoword target, he makes a lexicalisation error, producing instead a word which is phonologically or visually related to the target (Table 2). This contrasts very strongly with the errors he makes when reading function words (see Table 1). 2.5. Athematicity In various attempts to base a definition of functional categories on firmer theoret- ical ground, the selectional properties of functional categories were targeted (e.g. Table 2 MC™s errors on pseudowords Target heef taze slape purpise mather 
minacle pupit halocle utder MC™s response heifer haze slap purple mathematic minaret 
pulpit 
hafo udder minnow Rizzi, 1985). Ouhalla (1991) gives an overview of the s- and c-selectional properties of functional and lexical categories, suggesting that functional categories have the latter but not the former (and substantives show the opposite pattern). On the face of it, it seems that prepasitions have c-selectional but not s-selectional properties, so that on this criterion at least, they pattern with other functional categories. Ouhalla carefully avoids any mention of prepositions in his discussion, however; and it is not clear what would happen if, as discussed in Chomsky (1985), c-selection turns out to be reducible to s-selection after all. At any rate, it is clear that preposi~ons are not entirely non-participants in theta theory - in particular, they assign thematic rofes to indirect objects of V: (6) John put the presents under the bed, (7) Mary told John about the accident. Prepositional phrases can also appear in argument positions, receiving theta roles and case (see Neeleman and Weerman 1999, for extensive discussion of these prop- erties of English and Dutch PPs): (8) E,Under the bed] is a good hiding place. (9) I would choose [&hrough the woods] normally (but since it is raining . . .> To summarise, it is clear that P seems (on all existing criteria) to fall somewhere between lexical and functional categories. So far, it has been discussed that the usual analysis of the notion ‚functional category™ refers to closed class items, unstressed items, items which do not assign or receive a theta role, and items with Iittfe seman- tic content. Prepositions, however, are probably not dosed class, and they may receive stress in certain contexts. Many prepositions clearly have a great deal of semantic content - in particular, spatial and temporal prepositions. Most prepositions assign theta roles, so are in direct contradiction of the athematicity criterion for func- tiona1 categories. Some prepositions - in particular c$™ and passive b_v - are case markers, and there are interesting minimal pairs which illustrate the thematic effects of such prepositions - for example: 12 K. Froud I Lingua 111 (2001) l-28 (10) a. Henman™s defeat of Sampras (Sampras = Patient) b. Henman™s defeat by Sampras (Sampras = Agent) So, it seems that there are more arguments against than for the notion that prepo- sitions are functional in nature, at least as long as ‚functional™ is defined as meaning ‚possessing some combination of the properties discussed above™. Nevertheless, there remains a great deal of evidence from aphasia that prepositions pattern with f- heads, not lexical categories, when language is focally damaged. It is to be hoped that a syntactic theory with much to say about the representations of linguistic struc- ture in the mind/brain of a speaker/hearer may yield new insights into the underlying causes of such a pattern of breakdown. 3. Experimental investigation 3.1. Materials Recourse to existing case studies of aphasic deficits proved less than adequate when searching for data which provide sufficient detail for some linguistic analysis to be carried out and which could be used to clearly illustrate the problematic status of P. As has already been noted, the aphasic patient MC provides a rather unique opportunity to decide whether P is mentally represented as lexical or functional since his dissociation between substantives (which he is able to read) and f-heads (which he cannot read) is very robust. Therefore, a list of words and phrases was developed for MC to read. The list consisted of orthographically complex and simplex locative prepositions which made available some alternation between a prepositional realisation and some other lexical class. For instance, the simplex preposition behind can be used prepo- sitionally, as in (1 l), or nominally, as in (12); and the complex preposition in front of can alternate with a nominal, shown in (13) and (14): (11) behind the elephant (12) the behind of the elephant (13) in front of the house (14) the front of the house Since the orthographic and phonotactic structures of such pairs of stimuli differ from each other only minimally, it was anticipated that such a list would provide a real test of the representation of prepositions in MC™s damaged language faculty. Every word used in the construction of these examples was also presented to MC individ- ually, to see the results of removing phrasal contexts from such alternating items. It was expected that MC would treat the target words differently depending on the underlying syntactic representation of the stimulus. In (1 l), for instance, behind occupies a P node in the phrase marker; if P is a functional head, then MC is expected to make his characteristic function word substitution errors when reading K. Froud ! Lingua Ill (2001) 1-28 13 this word. In (12), on the other hand, behind occupies an N position, the complement of the determiner the. If MC is indeed making a distinction between categories on the basis of their syntactic properties alone, then we would expect him to treat the target word very differently in such examples; he should either read it correctly or make a morphological, visual or perhaps semantic error. The reasoning is similar for the complex P examples, though the underlying syntactic structure of these is less clear. This kind of experiment also provides a test of the underlyingly syntactic nature of MC™s deficit; if, as was anticipated, he treated words like behind as f-heads when they occupy a P node in a syntactic representation, but as lexical categories when they occupy an N position, then it is even clearer that an explanation for MC™s deficit (and other cases similar to his) really must be accounted for within a syntac- tic (rather than a semantic or phonological) framework. If, on the other hand, he seems to distinguish between the items on some other basis, then our current under- standing of his deficit would have to be radically altered. The words and phrases were printed on cards and their order randomised. They were presented to MC one at a time over a testing session of about two hours, with breaks as often as required. The experimental stimuli were interspersed with other, distractor items, both functional and lexical categories, to minimise any practice effects. The list was presented to MC a second time on a separate occasion, one month after the first testing session. A list of the test items for the prepositions experiment, and MC™s responses to them, is given as Appendix A to this paper. 3.2. Results Results were analysed as follows. Each of the target words was identified and the stimuli in which they appeared, as prepositions and as other categories (N or Adj), listed separately. MC™s responses to each stimulus were transcribed and classified. It was considered that those stimuli which appeared as single word items as well as in phrases (inside, in, on, of, behind) should be considered to be prepositional when they appear alone, since this is the more frequent usage of each of these items. MC™s responses to the target words only were classified. Thus, for the item the next to leave (in which the target word next appears in its adjectival alternation, assuming the presence of an ellipsed noun) MC produced the following response: ‚the leaves, the next door™. Because this response contains the target word in an identical struc- tural position to that provided in the stimulus, it was scored as correct. However, in response to the stimulus next to, MC said ‚top? no . . . next week?™ This was scored as incorrect, despite the fact that MC™s response contains an utterance of the target word, because the word next in MC™s response is syntactically different to that in the target. (This response was scored as a category change - adjectivisation.) All classi- fications of MC™s responses are shown in Appendix A. 3.3. Discussion of results Prima facie, it seems clear that MC does indeed treat prepositions as if they are f- heads. He produces another f-head, 43% of the time, only on those items which are 14 K. Froud I Lingua 111 (2001) l-28 syntactically represented as occupying a P node - there are no such errors on the same words when they are represented as occupying a lexical node (N or Adj), despite the fact that the target words are orthographically identical to their corre- sponding prepositional realisations. This result is highly significant (x2 = 10.03; p = < 0.01). The presence of a robust and exceptionally pure deficit like MC™s provides a unique opportunity to examine assumptions of syntactic theory. It is apparent from my earlier discussion that the status of prepositions is problematic in current syntac- tic theory, When exposed to an empirical test of this nature, it becomes clear that prepositions are, at least for MC, similar in representation to other f-heads. Table 3 Summary of results Response type: Target in P contexts (N = 60) Correct F-head substitution errors T i Target deleted P substituted for another P P substituted for a different f- head Category change Response type: Target in lexical contexts (N = 40) Correct Category change Other Example of response type No. of each % Percent response type 18 30 in front + ‚after™; on the top row + ‚before the top™ on + ‚and™; in front of the house + the front of the house™ (target in realised as the) 23 38.33 26 43.33 3 on the top + ‚the top™; in the front row 8 13.33 + ‚the front row™ on the top of the house -+ ‚the top of the house™ (nominalisation of top) 8 13.33 Example of response type No. of each response type 30 75.00 the off switch -+ ‚switch off the light™; on the top row -+ ‚before the top™ (targer 6 15.00 top nominalised) Word order: the inside of the box -_;, ‚the box inside™; Semantic: the behind of the elephant -+ ‚the back of the elephant, the front of the elephant™ 4 10.0 It can be observed from the results shown in Table 3 (and Appendix A) that most of MC™s so-called f-head substitution errors involve the substitution of another spa- K. Froud I Lingua III (2001) 1-28 1.5 tial or temporal preposition for the target word. At first pass it may seem that MC™s within-category substitutions are quite precise; identifying categorial features and then producing some other element with identical (or at least similar) categorial fea- tures. However, in the light of results obtained from MC over many months of test- ing, it is apparent that he has ‚favourite™ f-head responses, which tend to be ‚for™, ‚after™, before™, ‚in™, ‚because™, ‚ at™ and ‚and™ (see Table 1 for typical examples). The prevalence of P in the responses reported here is, then, more likely to be the result of him producing his ‚favourite™ f-heads, as he does when confronted with complemen- tisers, determiners, pronouns and so on, than the result of him recognising some fea- ture of prepositions which then constrains his response. On different occasions, MC has produced different categories in response to the locative prepositions used in this task, including determiners, conjunctions and pronouns. MC made many other kinds of errors on the reading task which suggest that he is using several (non-linguistic) strategies to support his damaged reading processes, and these strategies did serve to cloud the data. For instance, it seems plausible that he reads the word fop as if it is a substantive; so that when top participates in a prepositional construction, as in on top of or on top of the house, MC reads it as a noun (for instance, he responded on different occasions to the latter item as ‚on the top of the house™ and ‚the top of the house™). This may help to account for his error on next to, which he read as ‚top? no . . . next week? ‚. If he misread the prepositional to as the substantive top, this may have led him to misidentify the other part of the complex preposition as its adjectival congener. The presence of week may be just MC™s attempt to make sense of the stimulus which he is aware (from his rising into- nation) he has got wrong.9 It was hoped that MC™s responses to this task may also shed light on the proper syntactic realisation of complex prepositions, like in front of or next to. Are such items represented as single heads, or complex heads, or one head with accompany- ing specifiers? However, the interaction between MC™s reading strategies and his deficit proved to be too complex to admit such a level of analysis. For instance, MC treated in front as if it were a single f-head (response: ‚after™), and substituted a sin- gle word for the complex preposition in in front of the house (response: ‚in the house™). These data suggest that complex prepositions like in front of may be An anonymous reviewer suggests that ‚top™ as a substantive may be more frequent than ‚top™ as a preposition, so that what we see here is the result of organising principles of the orthographic lexicon, not a functional/lexical distinction. This is difficult to verify, since frequency databases (e.g. Kucera and Francis, 1967) do not include ‚top™ as a preposition, nor ‚on top of™ as a complex. However, frequency of word use has been demonstrated not to be a relevant variable for MC™s reading, and it does not seem likely that his reading of the elements presented here (all of which are very high frequency) would be affected by it. For example, on a list of the 100 most frequent English words, MC read only 14 correctly; 74 of these words were functional. On a list of the 100 least frequent written words, many of which were abstract and derivationally complex, he performed much better - 57 were read correctly, and most of his errors involved omission or substitution of affixes. (See Druks and Fraud, submitted.) On a PALPA sub- test (Kay et al., 1992), he read 31/40 high frequency substantives correctly, and 27/40 low frequency substantives. Since frequency did not have significant effects in these controlled reading lists, I do not believe that it is likely to have been a relevant variable here. 16 K. Froud I Lingua 111 (2001) l-28 syntactically represented as a single head. However, there is equivalent support for opposing views: MC read in front of (presented to him with no complement) as ‚front of™, which suggests that he produced only the NP (and not its functional extended projectioniO); and OIZ top was produced as ‚for top™, again suggesting that MC treats top as a substantive and only on as a prepositional/functional element. The standard account of complex prepositions is that two-word conglomerates have an adjective, adverbial or conjunction with a prepositional head, and three- word conglomerates are P+N+P sequences (e.g. Quirk et al., 1985). MC™s reading of the ‚on top of™ examples seems consistent with this analysis; however, his reading of the ‚in front of™ examples is not. It is a possibility that adverbial elements are as problematic for MC as other func- tional elements, because they are hypothesised to occupy specifier positions of func- tional projections (Cinque, 1999). If complex prepositions consist of an adverb, adjective or conjunction with a P head, then it may seem that we should predict those with adjectival elements in spec (such as ‚close to™) to be read better than those with functional elements in spec (such as ‚because of™). However, preliminary studies of MC™s reading of adverbial elements in isolation seem to suggest that he treats adver- bials as if they have some functional realisation, which in turn suggests that MC™s reading is sensitive only to the presence of an f-head, not to modifying elements which may appear in specifier positions. MC is then predicted to make function- word substitutions when reading complex prepositions, not on the basis of what kind of element is in spec, but on the basis that the head is functional. A full account of this aspect of MC™s performance remains to be worked out (Froud, in preparation); the data reported here, then, remain inconclusive on the matter of the true syntactic representation of complex prepositions. 3.4. Ruling out a semantic explanation Another kind of account is possible. Prepositions seem to encode relationships - between objects, times, places or grammatical entities (e.g. Bennett, 1975; Jacken- doff, 1990). Perhaps such a view could also be extended to other f-heads - that what such a heterogeneous class has in common is the ability to encode relationships between grammatical entities. l1 (This is similar to the traditional view of functional categories as the ‚syntactic glue™ of a language.) If this were the case, it may be pos- sible to capture a function word deficit like MC™s along semantic lines: perhaps there is some semantic primitive, call it RELATE, which is the feature which all f- heads (and some substantives) have in common. This might mean that MC™s break- down is in fact semantic in nature, not syntactic. This view seems unlikely to be true because the reading list used to investigate MC™s representation of prepositions included some possessives, such as the behind lo In the sense of Grimshaw (1991). ‚I This possibility was pointed out to me by Misi Brady; the means for testing it was developed with assistance from Neil Smith. K. Froud I Lingua 111 (2001) 1-28 17 of the elephant. A deficit which could be defined in terms of a semantic correlate having to do with relating things to each other would seem likely to have an effect on possessive constructions too; but no such effect was noted.‚* Nevertheless, as a further (and informal) test of the semantic hypothesis, another reading list was prepared for MC. This time it consisted of substantives which seemed to be likely candidates for having as one of their semantic correlates the hypothetical RELATE - for example, kinship terms and other nouns whose interpre- tation seems likely to involve some relationship (e.g. leader, slave, patient, friend), some verbs of relation (e.g. relate, compare, exclude), and possessive phrases (e.g. the girl™s cake, the woman™s cur). It was hypothesised that, if the semantic account of MC™s reading deficit is along the right lines, such a reading list would cause him extreme difficulty. If, however, his reading deficit cannot be defined along such semantic lines, the single word substantives and many of the substantives inside the possessive determiner phrases should be read well. In fact, MC™s performance on this secondary reading list supports the syntactic account of his underlying deficit (the whole list, and MC™s responses on two sepa- rate occasions of reading it, are given as Appendix B to this paper). Results are sum- marised in Table 4 below. Table 4 Summary of results from RELATE reading list Grammatical Example IV Number % read Error examples class of target read correctly correctly V N relate; compare 38 (19 items, presented twice) client; leader 30 (15 items, presented twice) Kinship terms sister; sibling; 42 (21 items, mother-in-law presented twice) Possessive DPs the woman™s 10 (5 items, car; the dog™s presented twice) cushion 25 28 40 65.79% donate _j ‚donor™; affect + ‚affection™ 93.33% accompanist -+ ‚accompanied™; understudy + ‚understate™ 95.24% parent + ‚parents™; daughter -+ ‚the daughter™ 7 70% the girl™s cake + ‚the daughter™s cake™; the boy™s book + ‚the boy™s books™ I2 In fact MC read the possessive PP, of&e _, correctly ten out of twelve times. This may seem to present a problem for my contention that MC cannot read f-heads, since the preposition of in a posses- sive construction is very likely just a case assigner, a really functional preposition. But in fact this pat- tern provides support for our conjectures about MC™s strategies when reading connected text. I would suggest that MC does not in fact read the possessive construction here, because he is unable to. What he can do is identify the substantives behind and elephant, which he then produces in a spoken phrase. He knows that the phrase he produces involves a behind and an elephant, and these items are not related by a verb; the only plausible description of a situation relating a behind to an elephant without using a verb or another argument is that the behind belongs to the elephant - which is what he says. 18 K. Froud I Lingua 111 (2001) l-28 As Table 4 shows, nouns and kinship terms caused MC no problems at all (and even his errors are minor, consisting of morphological and visual errors, not f-head substitutions). Likewise, his errors on possessive phrases and verbs, though more frequent, do not appear to reflect some inability to access a semantic notion of relat- edness. Of the three errors on possessives, one was semantic (the girl™s cake + ‚the daughter™s cake™), one was morphological (the boy™s book + ‚the boy™s books™) and only one involved omission of the possessive morpheme (the girl™s cake + ‚the girl . . . cakes . ..™ ). Errors on verbs were visual (e.g. entail + ‚entrail™) or morphological (e.g. join + ‚joint™; exclude + ‚excluded™) with the exception of one, when MC read cause as ‚before™. Such f-head substitution errors are characteristic of MC™s reading of f-heads, not substantives; but the existence of an abstract operator closely related to the verb cause has been posited before (see, e.g., Pesetsky, 1995) and it is possible that MC was simply recognising the functional nature of this item, leading to his error (in much the same way as his reading of unaccusatives is affected - Froud, 1998). Probably such a complicated verb should not have been included in this particular reading list. Nevertheless, even with these unclarities, these data are telling. MC™s robust and pure dissociation between substantives and other categories is maintained to a very significant degree when he attempts to read various kinds of complex and simplex prepositions; but his tendency to substitute f-heads in reading is abolished almost completely when the same orthographic representations participate in constructions which render them substantive. The assumption that MC™s reading does indeed frac- tionate along syntactic lines, and cannot be captured in terms of a semantic account, is supported by the observation that MC™s ability to read substantives is not dimin- ished when they have a semantic correlate in common with f-heads (the hypothetical RELATE). This, together with the substantial existing evidence from aphasic patients detailed in the literature, does rather suggest that the lexical/functional sta- tus of P in current syntactic theory should be clarified. It seems that some recasting of the problem may be called for. I have already sug- gested that the traditional distinction between functional and lexical categories is, to some extent, a hangover from prescriptive approaches to grammar rather than a the- oretically motivated distinction within current frameworks. This is why there is no coherent, unitary characterisation of the distinction - it is not really a part of the the- ory. If we are considering some notion of a primitive distinction between linguistic categories which carry conceptual information and those which are primarily utilised only within the language module per se, then it seems that the lexical/functional dis- tinction is perhaps not the one we really want to make - at least, not in terms of ath- ematicity, reduced semantic content, a lack of prosodic stress or any of the other cri- teria we have so far considered. It may be that the lexical/functional distinction as we know it at present is in fact a construct, rather than a primitive feature of the lan- guage faculty. It has been suggested (Wexler and Manzini, 1987; Ouhalla, 1991) that parametric variation between languages can be reduced to properties of the lexical representa- tions of functional categories. It may be that this observation provides the clue to a more primitive divide within the language faculty than the lexical/functional distinc- K. Froudl Lingua Ill (2001) l-28 19 tion (at least under current formulations). Perhaps, as has been proposed before (e.g. Smith and Tsimpli, 1995; Uriagereka, 1998), UG provides some innately specified component of the lexicon which contains those elements which can be the locus of parametrisation. Such a ‚UG lexicon™ would contain universal (procedural) items, complete with their associated syntactic structures and s-selectional features. The only ‚learning™ required for such items would be the acquisition of a mapping between each representation and its language-specific phonological form, as outlined in Uriagereka (1998: 454): ﬁ. [There is] a fundamental difference between functional and lexical items: people learn new lexical items after the critical period, but they don™t generally learn new grammatical items after puberty, at least when acquiring their first language, and (in most circumstances) they obviously acquire all these items much earlier than that. Which is best explained if we boldly assert that people don™t learn gram- matical items at all. That is to say, they learn their form, but not the items themselves. These are uni- versal.ﬂ It may also be the case that the items which are contained within such an innately specified lexicon are the very items which have phonologically null alternations available - in English, certainly C, I, D, Pm, K(ase) and various operators such as the empty subordinating operator $ (Cormack and Smith 1997). If these criteria (being a locus of parametric variation, and/or having a phonetically null alternation) are considered, it is possible to come up with a useful list of otherwise apparently heterogeneous items: complementisers, inflectional elements, determiners, pronouns and anaphors, prepositions, quantifiers, wh words, negation, subordinating and coor- dinating conjunctions, and probably some others - in fact, the same items as were earlier subsumed under the label ‚f-head™. It is not necessarily true that these two cri- teria (parametric variation across languages, and availability of a null alternation) are prerequisite for an item to be included in the ‚UG lexicon™; rather, it is more likely to be the case that items in the UG lexicon simply happen to have these properties because they are somehow primitive, universal, innately specified and so on. What is interesting is that when this distinction is made, the resulting class of items seems to be natural in some way - particularly with reference to the patterns of performance observed in case after case of acquired aphasia (in various modalities). In nonfluent aphasia, it tends to be these items which are damaged, or which have become diffi- cult to retrieve; the opposite pattern, or at least a relative sparing of these categories in the presence of damaged or unobtainable nouns, verbs and adjectives, appears in many types of fluent aphasia. If the notion of f-head really captures a natural class of lexical items, it may pro- vide a clue to the underlying deficit in many manifestations of agrammatism. For instance, f-heads are, it seems, also those items which provide landing sites for movement. An aphasic with no access to f-head representations would therefore pre- sumably also have a movement deficit, affecting (for example) their ability to inter- pret (or produce, or read, depending on the modality in which the deficit is mani- fested) non-canonical structures such as passives, clefts, wh-questions and so on. This has echoes of Grodzinsky™s (1990) trace deletion deficit - but without the need to propose a second deficit to account for the problems encountered by agrammatic 20 K. Froud / Lingua 111 (2001) l-28 aphasics with prepositions. If lexical representations of f-heads are not available to the syntax, then Merger to such positions is also presumably unavailable - a possible consequence of this being the well-documented omission of functional morphemes in agrammatic production (e.g., Goodglass, 1993). In fact, many variants of agrammatism may be capturable in similar ways. MC™s underlying deficit, for instance, may be characterisable as a modality-specific inability to retrieve syntactic information pertinent to f-heads. Whether MC™s deficit also affects movement processes is difficult to say, because (as discussed) his reading of sentences is very difficult to interpret in a theoretically motivated way, and the errors he makes inter- act in complex ways with strategies he has developed to help himself extract mean- ing from written text. 4. Concluding comments This section of the paper is, needless to say, extremely speculative. Nevertheless, some interesting issues are thrown up. For instance, why should it be the case that some innately specified lexicon should be so vulnerable to damage in the presence of a focal lesion to the brain? It may have been expected that an innately specified system of this kind could be more resistant to damage. But in fact some interesting light can be shed on this consideration too; if the proposed UG lexicon is indeed some innate component of the mind/brain, then it is likely (in common with other innate systems like vision, olfaction, audition, movement and so on) to be repre- sented in a relatively small, focalised area of the cortex, and hence to be particularly vulnerable to focal damage such as that sustained in a CVA. A conceptual lexicon, such as that which presumably includes lexical entries for the major categories N,V and A, would be more likely to be a distributed system, for several reasons: the con- ceptual lexicon includes representations of various different kinds of knowledge, including (probably) syntactic, semantic and phonological information, all of which may require the involvement of different cortical areas; also, the representation of encyclopaedic knowledge may also be mapped onto entries in a substantive lexicon, again suggesting that the whole system is likely to be much more distributed than the representation of items in the UG lexicon. Furthermore, vocabulary items in the con- ceptual lexicon are probably acquired in a different way to those in the innately spec- ified UG lexicon. As has been observed before, the availability of functional cate- gories appears to follow a distinct maturational path (e.g., Tsimpli, 1996; Borer and Wexler, 1987). One of the features of an innately specified modular system (in the sense of Fodor, 1983) is the distinct ontogeny of that system across a species; so the fact that functional categories appear to follow a particular course of development could be interpreted as providing support for the notion that they are innately repre- sented in, perhaps, a separate lexicon. The substantive lexicon can be easily added to (its ‚open-class™ nature) whereas the UG lexicon cannot (its ‚closed-class™ nature); and it seems unlikely that conceptual representations like those associated with sub- stantives would be associated with innate syntactic structures (for instance, a partic- ular concept may be associated with a copula + adjective in one language and a verb K. Froud I Lingua 111 (2001) 1-28 21 in another), whereas it seems far more likely that items in the UG lexicon are indeed innately specified for syntactic properties (inflectional elements, operators of various kinds, and so on, may be universally realised in surprisingly uniform ways). It may also be the case that the nature of the proposed UG lexicon requires some recourse to semantic theory to be understood. For instance, Jackendoff (1990) has suggested that there may be a universal grammar of concepts - a generative system which permits the acquisition of an infinite number of concepts, in the same way that a generative grammar contains the potential for all syntactic structures in all human languages to be projected. The precise,nature of the primitive components of such a system remains unclear, as does the nature of the primitives of UG. But perhaps it is reasonable to consider the possibility that the conceptual primitives and syntactic primitives parallel and interact with each other, to a greater or lesser extent. For instance, Bennett (1975) has proposed that (spatial and temporal) prepositions are simply the surface reflex of particular combinations of semantic properties (e.g. behind is the English realisation of ‚locative posterior place™); to speculate, perhaps the contents of a UG lexicon reflect precisely the available combinations of such meaning representations. I3 The empirical predictions of this view (not to mention its theoretical implications) remain to be worked out. For example, it may be that some- thing like the thematic role ‚Undergoer™ (which Jackendoff proposes is the role assigned to the derived subject of an unaccusative verb) is not only a conceptual primitive, but one which is associated with a particular syntactic structure, resulting in unaccusative syntax; if this is the case, it is predicted that an aphasic with a deficit affecting access to the UG lexicon may be unable to trigger unaccusative syntax and therefore show a similar pattern of responses to this class of verbs as to other cate- gories which require such access. Such a pattern of performance has been demon- strated for MC (Froud, 1998). Finally, it is also possible that other variables are relevant in the characterisation of agrammatic disorders. For instance, the reading task reported here utilised only locative prepositions, but it has been suggested that different kinds of preposition have different thematic properties (e.g. Giorgi, 1991). Locative prepositions, for instance, do not assign an external theta role, but non-locative (adjectival) preposi- tions may do so. MC, however, treats locative and non-locative prepositions in exactly the same way as each other, and in exactly the same way as he treats all other f-heads, so - at least for him - the locative/non-locative distinction is not relevant. Rizzi (1985) proposed an account of agrammatism which invokes a distinction between theta-assigners (which are preserved) and non-theta assigners (which are impaired); but this would predict that the majority of prepositions should still be available to MC, which is not the finding. It may of course be the case that there are variants of agrammatism in which the right distinction is indeed governed vs. ungoverned, or locative vs. non-locative, or theta-assigner vs. non-theta-assigner; but for MC, it has been demonstrated that these distinctions do not capture the underlying nature of his deficit. ﬂ Such a view may also account for the apparently closed nature of the syntactic categories which I am implicating. 22 K. Froud I Lingua 111 (2001) 1-28 To conclude, I hope I have demonstrated that the ambiguous status of prepositions in current syntactic theory reflects a real problem, especially for empirical investiga- tions in this domain, which may be addressed by re-examining the nature of the lex- ical/functional divide. MC™s results on a prepositions reading task provide additional support for the view that prepositions cannot be straightforwardly lexical; however, there are well-documented theoretical problems inherent in any classification of prepositions as functional. This has led to the suggestion that the real nature of the distinction between lexical and functional categories should be re-evaluated; it may be the case that some primitive property of the language faculty is showing up in empirical investigations, and that this could be usefully reflected in future investiga- tions of this sort. Appendix A: Preposition experimental stimuli Key: FS - f-head substitution FO - f-head deletion Stimuli Target : next next to next to the house the next the next to leave the next house Target: behind behind behind the elephant the behind of the elephant Target: inside inside inside the box the inside of the box Target: on on Responses Response classification top? no . next week? next to it correct next door, next house next the house, the front the leaves, the next door category change - adjectivisation correct correct category change correct other - ?perseveration category change - adjectivisation of nominal the length of the row, the lane, the house on the left correct the house next door - next other - ? perseveration correct correct forward correct the elephant, before, after before the elephant correct the back of the elephant, the front of the elephant FS correct FS FS correct other - semantic beside before before the box in the box inside the box the box inside FS FS FS FS FO + category change other before and FS FS K. Froud I Lingua 1 II (2001) I-28 23 on top on top of Stimuli on top of the house on the table on the top on the top row on the top of on the top of the house the on switch Target: front in front in front of in front of the house in the front row in the front of the house the front the front of the house the front row Target: top on top on top of on top of the house on the top on the top row for top a top, the top on the top on top. that is the difficult part. before? Responses on the top of the house the top of the house correct correct correct 
the top. I can™t do that, you see. on the house? before the top correct on the top the top of correct on top of the house the switch on switch on the light FS FS correct correct Response classification correct Fe, correct correct correct Fe! FS correct correct F0 correct correct correct 
category change after correct front of before the in the house the front of the house row, front row a front view. no, the row, the front row. on the front of the house front of the house correct after, before - the front correct correct correct correct FS correct category change FS FO category change correct the row in front. correct correct correct correct correct correct correct correct correct for top a top, the top on the top on top. that is the difficult part. before? on the top of the house the top of the house correct the top. I can™t do that, you see. before the top correct FS category change category change correct category change category change correct correct 
category change correct 24 on the top of on the top of the house Stimuli the top of the house the top the top row Target: off off off the table the off switch Target: in in in front in front of in front of the house in the front in the front row in the front of the house the ins and outs K. Fraud I Lingua I II (2001) 1-28 on the top correct the top of correct correct correct on top of the house category change Responses Response classification correct correct correct correct top correct correct correct correct correct correct correct for after after the table correct switch off the light correct FS FS FS correct category change correct before before, after, for after correct front of before the in the house the front of the house on the front inside, outside row, front row the front row front of the house on the front of the house correct the outs and ins FS FS FS correct F0 FS correct F0 FS FS F0 F0 FO F0 correct correct Appendix B: The RELATE reading list and responses Target Response 1 Response 2 Kinship terms sibling J J husband J J parent J parents sister-in-law J J aunt J J sister J J mother J J K. Fraud I Lingua III (2001) 1-28 25 uncle nephew mother-in-law cousin Target wife son-in-law father daughter-in-law 
son niece father-in-law brother-in-law brother daughter Nouns slave monarch client friend doctor prosecutor patient accompanist judge leader student defendant teacher understudy boss Target Verbs affect compare parallel receive approach exclude reply donate compare concern relate cause join J J J J J J J J Response 1 Response 2 J J J J J J J J J J J J J the daughter J J J J J J J J J J J J J J accompanied J J J J J J J J J J J J understate J J Response 1 Response 2 affectation affection J J J J J J J J J excluded J J donor donor J J J J J J before J joint joint 26 K. Froud / Lingua 111 (2001) l-28 connect give pertain 
include Target respond entail J J J forgiven J J J J Response 1 Response 2 response correspond entrail entrail Possessives the woman™s car J J the girl™s cake the daughter™s cake the girl . . . cakes . . . the dog™s cushion J J the boy™s book the boy™s books J the man™s house J J References Alajouanine, T., 1968. L™aphasie et le langage pathologique. Paris: Balliere. Bennett, D.C., 1975. Spatial and temporal uses of English prepositions: An essay in stratificational semantics. London: Longman. Bemdt, R.-S., 1987. Symptom co-occutrence and dissociation in the interpretation of agrammatism. In: M. Coltheart, G. Sartori and R. Job (eds.), The cognitive neuropsychology of language, 221-233. London: Erlbaum. Biassou, N., L.K. Obler, J.L. Nespoulous, M. Dordain and K.S. Harris, 1997. Dual processing of open and closed class words. Brain and Language 57, 360-373. Blakemore, D., 1987. Semantic constraints on relevance. Oxford: Blackwell. Borer, H. and K. Wexler, 1987. The maturation of syntax. In: T. Roeper and E. Williams (eds.), Para- meter setting, 123-172. Dordrecht: Reidel. Caplan, D., 1985. Syntactic and semantic structures in agrammatism. In: M.-L. Kean (ed.), Agramma- tism. New York: Academic Press, 125-152. Chan, B.H-s., 1999. Aspects of the syntax, production and pragmatics of codeswitching - with special reference to Cantonese-English. Ph.D. thesis, University College London. Chomsky, N., 1981. Lectures on government and binding. New York: Mouton de Gruyter. Chomsky, N., 1986. Knowledge of language: Its nature, origin and use. London: Praeger. Chomsky, N., 1993. A minimalist program for linguistic theory. In: K. Hale and S.J. Keyser (eds.), The view from building 20, l-52. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N., 1995. The minimalist program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Cinque, G., 1999. Adverbs and functional heads. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Cormack, A. and N.V. Smith, 1997. Checking features and split signs. UCL Working Papers in Lin- guistics, vol. 9. Druks, J. and K. Froud (submitted). The syntax of single words: evidence from a patient with a single word reading deficit. Submitted to Cognitive Neuropsychology, 2000. Emonds, J., 1985. A unified theory of syntactic categories. Dordrecht: Foris. Fodor, J., 1983. The modularity of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Friederici, A.D. and P.W. Schoenle, 1980. Computational dissociation of two vocabulary types: Evi- dence from aphasia. Neuropsychologia 18, 1 l-20. Friedman, R.B., 1995. Two types of phonological alexia. Cortex 31, 397403. Froud, K., 1998. Aphasic evidence for the syntactic determination of unaccusativity. UCL Working Papers in Linguistics, vol. 10. K. Froud I Lingua 1 I1 (2001) 1-28 27 Froud, K., in preparation. Agrammatism and the minimalist program: Evidence for the morphology interface from a case of acquired language pathology. Ph.D. thesis, University College London. Giorgi, A., 1991. Prepositions, binding and theta-marking. In: J. Koster and E. Reuland (eds.), Long dis- tance anaphora, 185-208. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Goodglass, H., 1993. Understanding aphasia. London: Academic Press. Grimshaw, J., 1991. Extended projection. Manuscript: Brandeis University. Grodzinsky, Y., 1988. Syntactic representations in agrammatic aphasia: The case of prepositions. Lan- guage and Speech 31, 115-134. Grodzinsky, Y., 1990. Theoretical perspectives on language deficits. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Hoekstra, T., 1995. The function of functional categories. Glot International l(2), 3-6. Howard, D., 1985. Agrammatism. In: S. Newman and R. Epstein (eds.), Current perspectives in dys- phasia. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone. Jackendoff, R., 1990. Semantic structures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Jaeggli, O., 1986. Passive. Linguistic Inquiry 17, 587422. Kay, J., R. Lesser and M. Coltheart, 1992. PALPA: Psycholinguistic assessments of language process- ing in aphasia. Hove: Erlbaum. Kean, M.-L., 1977. The linguistic interpretation of aphasia syndromes: Agrammatism in Broca™s apha- sia, an example. Cognition 5, 9-46. Kortmann, B. and E. Konig, 1992. Categorial reanalysis: The case of deverbal prepositions. Linguistics 30.67 l-697. Kucera, H. and W.N. Francis, 1967. Computational analysis of present-day American English. Provi- dence, RI: Brown University Press. Database available online at http://www.psy.uwa.edu.au/MRC- DataBase Marshall, J.C., 1986. The description and interpretation of aphasic language disorder. Neuropsychologia 24( 1), 5-24. Miceli, G., M.C. Silveri, C. Romani and A. Caramazza, 1989. Variation in the pattern of omissions and substitutions of grammatical morphemes in the spontaneous speech of so-called agrammatic patients. Brain and Language 36,447492. Morton, J. and K. Patterson, 1980. Little words - no! In: M. Coltheart, K. Patterson and J.C. Marhall (eds.), Deep dyslexia, 270-285. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. Neeleman, A. and F. Weerman, 1999. Flexible syntax: A theory of case and arguments. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Ouhalla, J., 199 1. Functional categories and parametric variation. London: Routledge. Patterson, K., 1982. The relation between reading and phonological coding: Further neuropsychological observations, 77-l 11. In: A.W. Ellis (ed.), Normality and pathology in cognitive functioning. Lon- don: Academic Press. Pesetsky, D., 1995. Zero syntax: Experiencers and cascades. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Quirk, R., S. Greenbaum, G. Leech and J. Svartvik, 1985. A comprehensive grammar of the English lan- guage. Harlow: Longman Group. Rizzi, L., 1985. Two notes on the linguistic interpretation of Broca™s aphasia. In: M.-L. Kean (ed.), Agrammatism, 153-164. New York: Academic Press. Saffran, E.M., R.S. Bemdt and M.F. Schwartz, 1989. The quantitative analysis of agrammatic produc- tion: Procedure and data. Brain and Language 37,44&479. Saffran, E.M., M.F. Schwartz and O.S.M. Marin, 1980. The word order problem in agrammatism II: Production. Brain and Language 10, 263-280. Schwartz, M.F., E.M. Saffran and O.S.M. Marin, 1980. The word order problem in agrammatism I: Comprehension. Brain and Language 10.249-262. Smith, N.V. and I.-M. Tsimpli, 1995. The mind of a savant: Language learning and modularity. Oxford: Blackwells. Tesak, J. and P. Hummer, 1994. A note on prepositions in agrammatism. Brain and Language 46(3), 463468. Tissot, R.J., G. Mounin and F. Lhetmitte, 1973. L™Agrammatisme. Brussels: Dessart. Tsimpli, I.-M.. 1996. The prefunctional stage of first language acquisition: A crosslinguistic study. New York: Garland. 28 K. Froud I Lingua 111 (2001) 1-28 Uriagereka, J., 1998. Rhyme and reason: An introduction to minimalist syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Wexler, K. and M.-R. Manzini, 1987. Parameters and learnability in binding theory. In: T. Roeper and E. Williams (eds.), Parameter setting, 41-76. Dordrecht: Reidel. 