ELSEVIER Lingua 111 (2001) 71-80 www.elsevier.nl/locate/lingua Book review* Review of David Lightfoot, The development of language: Acquisition, change, and evolution. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 1999. Reviewed by Dawn MacLaughlin, Visiting Assistant Professor, McGill Univer- sity, Department of Linguistics, 1085 Docteur Penfield, Montreal, QC H3A lA7, Canada, 5 14-398-7447, dawnmac@mediaone.net The premise of this intriguing book about language change is that ﬁany theory of grammar and any theory of acquisition need to be compatible with the fact that lan- guages changeﬂ (p. x). By studying language change, Lightfoot argues, one can gain insight into the nature of human language and how language is acquired. Lightfoot presents a view of language change that does not involve any theory of change per se (there are no laws of change). Language change occurs at the level of the indi- vidual; a child may acquire a grammar that is somewhat different from that of the parents, and this changed grammar may then spread throughout a population. Light- foot proposes a conception of language acquisition that, he claims, is superior to other current proposals in that it allows one to account for language change, whereas others cannot. He discusses several ways in which English has changed over time (e.g., the loss of case morphology and the loss of verb raising), and shows how these changes might have taken place, given his view of acquisition and the occurrence of certain contingent factors. Finally, he also addresses the issue of the evolution of the language faculty, presenting a view that goes against some of the more popular ideas on language evolution that have been offered (e.g., Newmeyer, 1991; Pinker and Bloom, 1990). Lightfoot™s book is geared towards both linguists and non-linguists (ﬁbeginning graduate students and .., historians, biologists, and physicists who have thought a lit- tle about languageﬂ (p. xi)). Writing for these two audiences is an ambitious goal, and although there is a lot that non-linguists can gain from reading this book, lin- guists may find it frustrating in places. The book contains some amount of technical discussion (couched within the Principles and Parameters and Minimalist frame- works) of aspects of the syntax of historical English, including issues relating to case theory, functional categories, verb raising, and the verb-second constraint. Lightfoot * I am grateful to Marco Haverkort and Margaret Thomas for helpful comments on an earlier draft. 0378-2166/01/$ - see front matter 0 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(00)00028-O 12 Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 71-80 briefly introduces some of the fundamental concepts underlying these notions in order to make them accessible to the non-linguist (however, non-linguists may still find parts of these discussions difficult). Omission of details, in an effort to increase accessibility to a more general audience, does at times result in the linguist having to guess about certain aspects of the analysis, thus making the argumentation difficult to evaluate. Lightfoot uses shading to mark passages viewed as containing details for linguists only, and he suggests the non-linguists might want to skip over these passages. In practice, however, the use of the shading device is problematic. In some cases, skip- ping over the shaded passage creates a discontinuity: material after the passage refers to concepts or examples mentioned in the passage (see, for example, the pas- sages on pages 139, 187, 216-217). Other times, the passages feel like footnote material, providing additional details that are not technical at all, so do not need to be so marked (pp. 85-87, 211, 220-221). Non-linguists may want to skim, not skip, these passages. There are also a few other minor annoyances to mention. First, examples are gen- erally presented without any word-for-word or morpheme-for-morpheme glosses, forcing the reader to devote some effort to reconstructing the correspondence between the example and the English translation (see, e.g., (1) below). Second, Lightfoot consistently uses the term ‚NP/DP™. Here is a case where non-linguists don™t care about the DP analysis, while syntacticians would be able to accommodate more general terminology. There is no need to use the technical terminology here. Third, Lightfoot provides a long, ten-line quotation in French (p. 255) for which no English translation is provided. Finally, what is sorely lacking is any kind of time- line summarizing the historical changes that Lightfoot discusses. As a reader, I found myself attempting to construct my own timeline, so that I could see which changes (discussed in various places) were occurring when, and how all the changes were related to each other. The book is organized into ten chapters. The first chapter introduces the reader to the field of language change and provides some basic background about the history of English. Here, Lightfoot presents examples of language change occurring at all linguistic levels, and he argues that language change should be viewed as neither progress nor degeneration. Some discussion of important issues related to working with historical texts is presented, perhaps too briefly. As Lightfoot points out, the scribes and editors who have authored the texts available to us may have introduced changes in order to conform to some kind of standard form. Different editors may have slightly different grammars, with obvious consequences. In addition, historical linguists have found in many cases alternations between structures within a single text (perhaps revealing a change in progress, Lightfoot suggests). Lightfoot deliber- ately avoids discussion of how one is to properly interpret these historical records (and he does not provide a reference where one could find such discussion). Chapter 2 presents an interesting and informative discussion of work on language change in the nineteenth century. The reader learns that the main focus of linguistic research during that time was a theory of language change; linguistics was a histor- ical science. Linguists, focusing exclusively on phonology, and influenced by the Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 71-80 73 work of Darwin and Marx, aimed to uncover laws of change that would allow both prediction of the form a language would take in the future and reconstruction of ear- lier forms. What emerged were proposed laws of change, such as Grimm™s law and Vemer™s law. Languages were thought to evolve in a certain direction, although there was disagreement as to what this direction was. For example, some claimed that languages evolved toward a simpler, more natural form. As Lightfoot notes, the highly deterministic view of change (in linguistics and other fields) that was held by scholars of this period does not leave room for contingent, unpredictable factors that may have major consequences. Lightfoot points out another problem characterizing the nineteenth-century work on language change: historical linguists of the time viewed language as a gross entity; they did not consider language at the level of the individual. In contrast, modem views hold that ‚language™ is an epiphenomenon, the aggregate output of a group of individual grammars. Individuals ‚grow™ grammars - systems of knowl- edge represented in the individual mind/brain. This is the topic of the third chapter, where Lightfoot presents what should be, for generative linguists, well-known arguments concerning the nature of linguistic knowledge, the notion of Universal Grammar, the poverty of the stimulus problem, and the logical problem of language acquisition. He also (very briefly) introduces some basic concepts underlying phrase structure, functional categories, and wh-movement. He supports his discus- sion with well-known examples of wanna and is contraction and pronominal bind- ing in English, and also discusses some experimental work on children™s early mas- tery of linguistic constraints. Generative linguists probably will not find any new information here, but this chapter is an important one for Lightfoot™s targeted non- linguist readers. Once one comes to see language as an individual phenomenon, the only way to view language change, Lightfoot claims, is in terms of changes to individual gram- mars, with these changes spreading through a population. Chapter 4 presents his con- ception of how such change must take place. According to Lightfoot, children are the instruments of change, not adults (Lightfoot, 1979, 1991; Clark and Roberts, 1993; Kroch and Taylor, 1997; see also Sperber, 1996, who proposes a similar explanation for cultural change). Children may acquire a grammar that differs from that of their parents - if the child™s linguistic input differs from the input the parents received while they were children. Lightfoot suggests that adult grammars do not exhibit any significant change over time. Certainly, as Lightfoot notes, the lexicon grows in adulthood (e.g., innovation of new terms, idioms, and slang expressions), and certain structures may come to be used in novel ways or with different frequen- cies of occurrence, but these changes do not reflect changes to the underlying gram- mar. However, they do represent changes to the input to which children will be exposed, and it is precisely these differences that may trigger a different grammar in the next generation of language learners. Lightfoot draws on catastrophe theory as an appropriate model for language change. Such a theory is not fully predictive, but it is explanatory. Catastrophe the- ory maintains that there are certain system inputs that can cause a system to shift from one equilibrium point to another. At such catastrophe points, small changes in 74 Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 71-80 the input can result in major shifts in the system. At other points, similar changes may have little or no effect. For example, a small change in temperature can cause a catastrophic shift whereby water solidifies to ice. In language, a small change in voice onset time can result in a shift in the sound that is perceived. As Lightfoot argues, many cases of language change can be attributed to changes in the frequency of certain properties of the input, resulting in the triggering of different properties in an individual™s grammar. The final topic of this chapter to be discussed here is the issue of the apparent optionality of certain forms in the history of English. For example, in Old English, both verb second (V2) and non-V2 word orders are found in main clauses, some- times within a single text. How can we account for this? Lightfoot does not want to allow for the existence of grammars with optional verb-second properties (or for optional parameter settings generally). Instead, he appeals to the notion of compet- ing grammars, proposed by Kroch and colleagues (see Kroch, 1989, and other refer- ences cited in Lightfoot). Bilingual children who are exposed to two or more lan- guages from birth ‚grow™ multiple grammars. It has been suggested that monolingual speakers may also develop multiple coexisting grammars, what has been referred to as ‚internalized diglossia™. While this possibility opens many questions (about leam- ability issues and language use, for example, although analogous questions presum- ably arise in the case of bilingual acquisition, particularly when the two languages are similar), Lightfoot favors it because it provides a potential explanation for cases of apparent optionality in the history of English. Lightfoot suggests that some indi- viduals may have one grammar (e.g., a V2 grammar), others may have a different grammar (e.g., non-V2), and yet others may have both grammars (V2 and non-V2). However, Lightfoot views optionality (and hence internalized diglossia, presumably) as being unusual and unstable, and states that eventually, one or the other grammar will spread through the population and win out. Another area where the issue of optionality arises is with respect to children™s lan- guage, the now well-known ‚optional infinitive™ stage (Rizzi, 1993/1994; Wexler, 1994, 1998; among others) being a prime example. Most accounts of optionality in child language do not resort to multiple competing grammars, instead suggesting the emergence of certain syntactic and/or pragmatic principles that serve to constrain the grammar and eliminate options that were available at an earlier stage. However, if Lightfoot, Kroch, and others are correct in suggesting that competing grammatical systems can coexist within an individual (and hence can be acquired somehow), should not such solutions be seriously considered for aspects of children™s language that exhibit optionality? In the case of optional infinitives, a significant characteris- tic of this phenomenon is that children are producing structures (declarative root infinitives) that are not part of their linguistic input; that is, these structures are not triggered by positive data. In this respect, the optional infinitive phenomenon differs from the variation in forms resulting from internalized diglossia, as presumably, Lightfoot (and others) would claim that those individuals who develop two com- peting grammars (e.g., one V2 and one non-V2) do so based on exposure to rele- vant positive data triggering the two systems. Thus, while optional infinitives do not appear to be the result of internalized diglossia, the question remains as to Book review I Lingua 1 I I (2001) 71-80 15 whether there are cases of optionality in child language that may be triggered by positive evidence, hence potentially indicative of underlying competing grammars. Chapter 5 presents the first detailed, technical discussion of a major change in the history of English: the loss of case morphology and the resulting syntactic conse- quences. This is perhaps the most technical chapter in the book, and here we begin to encounter difficulties resulting from Lightfoot™s desire to make the book accessi- ble to both linguists and non-linguists. The level of detail at times seems appropriate to neither target audience: too little detail prevents the linguist from gaining a clear picture of the theoretical assumptions that are being adopted, while too much detail is likely to overwhelm a non-linguist. The technical background on case is introduced in the first section (5 pages) of this chapter. After introducing morphological case, using Old English™s four-way case system and modem English™s pronoun system as examples, Lightfoot intro- duces the notion of abstract case and the constraint that all noun phrases must be in or move to a position that is case-marked (i.e., the Case Filter). Lightfoot provides examples of passive constructions, possessor raising within the noun phrase, and raising in seems constructions as illustrations of this movement. (Lightfoot does not mention that this view of abstract case and noun phrase movement is particular to the theoretical approach that he has adopted, and not of other syntactic frameworks.) Lightfoot contrasts noun phrase movement, as movement to a case position, with wh-movement, which involves movement from a case position. It is unclear why wh-movement is brought into the picture at all; its introduction does not serve to support any particular argument, and the contrast may only further overwhelm the non-linguist reader. Lightfoot states (p. 114): ﬁAll grammars have some kind of case system, but only some have morphological case; the rest have abstract Caseﬂ. This statement might seem odd to many syntacticians, as the framework Lightfoot adopts holds that all grammars have abstract case. It is at this point that Lightfoot introduces the conven- tion of distinguishing ‚case™ and ‚Case™: the former is used to refer to overt mor- phological markers, while the latter refers to abstract Case. Later (p. 115), he sug- gests, in contradiction to the previously quoted statement, that ﬁabstract Case occurs in all grammars and must be realized [emphasis in original] in some fashion; mor- phological case is then just one means of realizing abstract Caseﬂ. In Old English, case was realized morphologically. What is not explained is how abstract Case is realized in modem English, that is, what the Old English system turned into. What Lightfoot seems to be trying to do is introduce the distinction between structural and inherent case, although this is not clearly explicated. He adopts an approach that links Case to thematic roles. However, it is not clear what the nature of this link is supposed to be. Does the case assigner have to assign a thematic role as well (what about nominative case assignment by Infl)? Lightfoot states (p. 116) that ﬁit is a property of UG that Ns [nouns] assign inherent Case to the left or to the right, and the Case is linked with a thematic roleﬂ. However, the notion of inherent case is never defined - the closest one can come to an explication is contained in a shaded section preceding this quotation (but that passage is geared for the linguist, and it appears to expect the reader to already know what inherent case is). Perhaps 16 Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 71-80 Lightfoot intends that the link between Case and thematic roles is only relevant for inherent case, not structural case. It is unfortunate that this crucial background mate- rial is not more clearly presented. After introducing his assumptions concerning case theory, Lightfoot turns to dis- cuss syntactic consequences of the loss of genitive case, particularly with respect to the split genitive construction exemplified in (1). This construction existed in Old English and underwent significant change in Middle English, finally evolving into modem English genitives. (1) a. b. Elfredes godsune cyninges (Lightfoot, p. 118, ex. (lOa,c), as presented there) ‚King Alfred™s godson™ Iohannes dagum fulwihteres ‚From the days of John the Baptist™ What is interesting about this construction is that genitive-marked nominals appear on both sides of the head noun. These nominals must both be thematically related to the head noun, and in fact, it would appear that they both refer to the same referent. Lightfoot presents an intricate discussion of the stages of evolution of this construc- tion into modem English genitives, arguing that only an analysis that links Case to thematic roles can account for the data. In other words, Lightfoot is using historical evidence to argue for a particular theoretical proposal. The remainder of the chapter addresses consequences of the loss of dative case marking (with respect to the loss of impersonal passives and transitive adjectives, the emergence of prepositional and indirect passives, the rise of nominative-accusative structures, and changes to psych-verbs). According to Lightfoot, all of the changes discussed in this chapter were introduced by children who were exposed to linguis- tic input that was different (for a variety of reasons) from what their parents had received such that the input triggered a different grammatical system. The next chapter (Chapter 6) presents a model of language acquisition that Light- foot claims to be superior to other existing models. He suggests that UG-based error- driven ‚input-matchingﬂ models, which select or converge on a grammar that best matches the input (he cites Gibson and Wexler (1994) and Clark (1992) as exam- ples), cannot account for language change. Although he admits that such models can allow a child to converge on a grammar that is different from that of the parents, that grammar would still be one that matches the input as closely as possible. The prob- lem, Lightfoot states, is that ﬁsometimes children do not match their input at any stage, including the final stage. . . . Consequently, it will not be productive to insist that successful language acquisition always has children converging on grammars which generate the sentences that they hearﬂ (p. 147). Lightfoot cites creolization as a case where children do not match their input. ™ Lightfoot distinguishes input-matching models with an innate component from ‚pure™ input-matching models, with no innate component, as represented by MacWhinney and Bates (1990). for example. It is only the former that are intended here. Book review / Lingua II I (20011 71-80 17 Lightfoot™s statements concerning the inadequacy of other language learning algorithms are unconvincing, and he does not provide any supporting arguments to demonstrate their inability to account for language change. In fact, Lightfoot dis- cusses in some detail the recent work of Niyogi and Berwick (1997 and elsewhere), who report on a computer simulation of language change based on Gibson and Wexler™s (1994) Triggering Learning Algorithm (TLA).2 It is particularly interesting that Niyogi and Berwick (I 997) address the loss of V2 in French, because Lightfoot, in his discussion of the loss of V2 in English, claims that input-matching models, such as the TLA, cannot account for this change: ﬁIf learners simply seek grammars which match the input, there is no reason why verb-second sentences should have been lostﬂ (p. 157). The success of Niyogi and Berwick™s model would seem to con- tradict Lightfoot™s position that learning algorithms such as the TLA cannot account for language change. As an alternative to input-matching algorithms, Lightfoot proposes a cue-based model of acquisition: children scan their environment for certain UG-designated, unambiguous ‚cues™; the resulting grammar is a by-product of the cues that are found. A cue is a piece of structure. As the language learner processes an input, per- haps only partially, the resulting representations are scanned for cues. Only simple structural domains are examined for cues, as per Lightfoot™s (1991) degree-0 leam- ability (however, given that representations may be only partial, it seems possible that the learner will construct a partial, unembedded representation of embedded input material). If the cue is found robustly in the input data (where what counts as ‚robust™ may differ from one cue to another, these robustness criteria presumably being determined by UG), the cue will be adopted as a property of the grammar. There are no parameters in the traditional sense. Instead, there are cues for verb rais- ing, head-first, and head-last, etc. There is assumed to be a specific learning path: cues are ordered to reflect the dependencies among them, such that certain cues must be established before others can be sought. Cue-based learning is also claimed to be deterministic, in that once a cue has been established, it cannot be changed. Note finally that whether the child™s grammar can generate a certain structure (i.e., match the input) is irrelevant. While this cue-based model is still admittedly in the ‚embryonic™ stage, Lightfoot shows how it can account for certain changes that took place in the history of Eng- lish, specifically the loss of verb second and verb raising, and other more small-scale changes in English and French (e.g., the recategorization of modal verbs in English and the evolution of French chez, addressed in Chapter 7). The first of these changes will be explored here. According to Lightfoot, the unambiguous cue for the V2 property is an arbitrary non-subject XP in Spec, CP of the matrix clause. Statistical analyses of several Ger- manic V2 languages have revealed that a non-subject appears in initial position 2 See also Briscoe (2000), who proposes a computational model of language acquisition that, like Niyogi and Berwick, builds on the TLA, although Briscoe extends and modifies the TLA in a number of interesting ways. Briscoe presents the results of a number of experiments showing how the proposed model can account for aspects of language acquisition, change, and evolution. 78 Book review I Lingua 111 (2001) 71-80 approximately 30% of the time (subjects appear in initial position the remaining 70%). Thus, it must be the case that the V2 property can be acquired by encounter- ing this cue in 30% of matrix clauses (that is, 30% counts as ‚robust™ for this cue). As previously mentioned, Old English and Middle English texts actually show both V2 and non-V2 structures. That is, they appear to exhibit optional V2. In fact, Light- foot suggests there existed two dialects: a northern, Scandinavian-based V2 dialect and a southern non-V2 dialect. As northern children began to be exposed to more of the southern dialect, they would have heard more non-V2 structures. As a result, the frequency of the V2 cue would have fallen below the robustness threshold, and the V2 property would have ceased to be acquired. This scenario suggests that, as the two dialects came into contact, the southern one became dominant. Presumably, if the northern dialect had dominated, the southern children might have encountered robust V2 cues, resulting in acquisition of the V2 property. In sum, the V2 property was lost because the circumstance of language contact between two dialects decreased the robustness of the V2 cue in the learner™s input. Lightfoot™s account of language change, building on his cue-based approach to acquisition, involves some contingent factor(s) disturbing the frequency distribution of cues that a language learner receives, such that certain properties are ‚triggered™ differently. Research on children™s language development has, in fact, shown that cues (or parameter settings) are established at a very early age. For example, Wexler (1998) proposes that most, if not all, parameters are set at least by the earliest age at which we can reasonably test children (say, 24 months), including parameters related to basic word order, verb raising, verb second, and null arguments. If this is correct, then whatever contingent factors occur to induce a change must have influence over a child™s input from the very earliest ages. That is, one of our Old/Middle English children with VZspeaking parents who ended up acquiring a non-V2 grammar must have received significant exposure to a non-V2 dialect prior to age 2. This raises some interesting ethnographic questions. For example, what kind of lives did Old and Middle English infants lead, such that they would be exposed to more than one dialect at such a young age? Alternatively, one could abandon Lightfoot™s determin- istic view of acquisition and allow cues, once established, to be lost if they are not robustly encountered over a certain period of time. An important point that emerges from the discussion in this chapter is that work on language change can provide unique insight into the relationship between lin- guistic input (triggers or cues) and underlying grammatical properties. For example, with respect to the loss of verb raising in English, evidence from the progression of this change suggests that the verb raising property cannot be linked (solely) to ‚rich™ agreement morphology or the presence of do-support. According to Lightfoot, verb raising in English persisted into the eighteenth century, yet verbal inflection was lost well before this, and periphrastic do appeared in the fifteenth-sixteenth century. Thus, the historical record provides information not only about what properties of a language have undergone change but also of the evolution of the linguistic input to the children that instigate that change. In Chapter 8, Lightfoot argues against several alternative modem accounts of lan- guage change that draw upon principles of change, typological drift, simplification, Book review i Lingua 111 (2001) 7l-80 79 generalization, elimination of optionality, facilitation, and the like (e.g., Keyser and O™Neill, 1985; Roberts, 1993). All these accounts have in common the idea that lan- guage change can take place of its own accord, without external influences. If it were the case that languages tend towards simplification, generalization, etc., then how did the complex, exceptional properties ever arise ? Lightfoot holds that, in order to account for language change, one only needs an account of how the input to the lan- guage learner has changed, in conjunction with an appropriate theory of acquisition. Diachronic linguists have generally operated with the assumption that, during the period of time under examination, the language faculty itself has not undergone change. That is, new principles have not evolved since, say, eleventh century Eng- lish; the same set of principles and parameters of UG that account for modem Eng- lish are also applicable to Old English. But when did the language faculty evolve? Did it evolve in whole fashion or piecemeal? In Chapter 9, Lightfoot takes on such issues. Lightfoot argues that, while UG as a whole may represent an adaptive devel- opment, some aspects of UG are dysfunctional, maladaptive by-products of other properties. Lightfoot draws an interesting parallel between evolutionary change at the genetic level and grammatical change: both take place in fits and starts, both are triggered by certain environmental factors, and in both cases, the result is shaped by environmental factors in combination with the internal properties of the system, which limit the changes that may take place. Throughout his book, Lightfoot has shown how work on language change can reveal interesting evidence about the nature of the language faculty and language acquisition. In the final chapter, Lightfoot proposes that work on language change can serve as a model for work in other areas of history. Lightfoot convincingly argues that it is not possible to come up with a set of laws to predict change. Lan- guage is a chaotic system, prone to perturbation by unpredictable factors. However, while it is impossible to predict in the long-term how the system will evolve, changes can be explained retrospectively. In addition, given a detailed description of a set of inputs to the system, it should be possible to predict the system™s immediate outcome. So it is with evolutionary, political, and social change as well. The nature of such systems requires a ‚chaotic™ view of science, rather than a classic Aris- totelian-Newtonian one. We are at a stage where we have some understanding about how changes in the input can affect changes in the language system. Once we are armed with a comprehensive theory of the language faculty and of language acquisi- tion (particularly, the cues needed to trigger various properties), we should be able to predict how a language will change (in the short term), given a detailed description of the changed set of input conditions. What we will not be able to explain is why the input conditions changed in the way that they did. Overall, Lightfoot™s book provides interesting and thought-provoking discussion of language acquisition, change, and evolution; thus, it is recommended for anyone with interests in these areas. Non-linguists should find the book enjoyable, although some parts may be a bit too technical. Linguists can also benefit from reading the book, if it is approached with the understanding that the ideas contained within are presented at a somewhat superficial level and are not always supported with detailed argumentation. 80 Book review I Lingua I1 1 (2001) 71-80 References Briscoe, T., 2C!00. Grammatical acquisition: Inductive bias and coevolution of language and the lan- guage acquisition device. Language 76, 245-296. Clark, R., 1992. The selection of syntactic knowledge. Language Acquisition 2, 83-149. Clark, R. and 1. Roberts, 1993. A computational model of language learnability and language change. Linguistic Inquiry 24, 299-345. Gibson, E. and K. Wexler, 1994. Triggers. Linguistic Inquiry 25, 407454. Keyser, S.J. and W. O™Neil, 1985. Rule generalization and optionality in language change. Dordrecht: Foris. Kroch, A., 1989. Reflexes of grammar in patterns of language change. Language Variation and Change 1, 199-244. Kroch, A. and A. Taylor, 1997. The syntax of verb movement in Middle English: Dialect variation and language contact. In: A. van Kemenade and N. Vincent (eds.), Parameters of morphosyntactic change, 297-325. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lightfoot, D., 1979. Principles of diachronic syntax. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Lightfoot, D., 1991. How to set parameters: Arguments from language change. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. MacWhinney, B. and E.A. Bates, 1990. The cross-linguistic study of sentence processing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Newmeyer, F., 1991. Functional explanation in linguistics and the origin of language. Language and Communication 11, 3-28. Niyogi, P. and R.C. Berwick, 1997. Evolutionary consequences of language learning. Linguistics and Philosophy 20,697-7 19. Pinker, S. and P. Bloom, 1990. Natural language and natural selection. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 13,707-784. Rizzi, L., 1993/1994. Some notes on linguistic theory and language development: The case of root infinitives. Language Acquisition 3, 371-393. Roberts, I., 1993. Verbs and diachronic syntax. Dordrecht: Kluwer. Sperber, D., 1996. Explaining culture: A naturalistic approach. Malden, MA: Blackwell. Wexler, K., 1994. Optional infinitives, head movement and the economy of derivations. In: N. Homstein and D. Lightfoot (eds.), Verb movement, 305-350. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Wexler, K., 1998. Very early parameter setting and the unique checking constraint: A new explanation of the optional infinitive stage. Lingua 106, 23-79. 