ELSEVIER Lingua 112 (2002) 235-241 www.elsevier.com/locate/lingua Book review S. Hunston and G. Francis, Pattern grammar: A corpus-driven approach to the lexical grammar of English. Amsterdam: Benjamins, 2000. Reviewed by Robert Borsley, Department of Language and Linguistics, Univer- sity of Essex, Wivenhoe Park, Colchester CO4 3 SQ, UK. Mainstream linguistics has often been criticized for its excessive concentration on English. It is somewhat surprising, therefore, to find that there are those who seem to think that mainstream work has nothing useful to say about English. This appears to be the view of the authors of the book under review. They refer to almost no work on English grammar within mainstream linguistics. Moreover, it is not just work which emphasizes theoretical issues that they ignore. They also ignore work with a descriptive emphasis, such as Rodney Huddleston™s (e.g. Huddleston, 1984). It is hard to believe that they are unaware of such work. After all, Birmingham, where they are based, is not one of those difficult parts of the world where academic liter- ature is hard to get hold of. Presumably, then, they have decided that it is of no rel- evance to them. As I will indicate below, it is clear that they are not alone in taking this view. Thus, there is a phenomenon of some importance here. One might suppose that a book called Pattern Grammar is advocating a new the- ory of grammar, a competitor to such theories as Minimalism, Lexical-Functional Grammar, Head-driven Phrase Structure Grammar, etc. This book, however, is doing nothing of the sort. Its main concern is the selectional properties of lexical items, i.e. the sort of phenomena that have been discussed within syntactic theory under the heading of subcategorization or category-selection. As Hunston and Francis put it, their main focus is ﬁthe patterns that are associated with particular lexical items and that are observable from investigation of an electronically-stored corpus of written and spoken textﬂ (p. 1). The book touches on certain other matters but it is certainly not offering a general theory of grammar. ‚Movement™ phenomena, which are cen- tral to most theories of grammar, are seen by Hunston and Francis as just perturba- tions of their patterns (pp. 59-66). Probably they recognize that they are not propos- ing a new theory of grammar, but it is hard to be sure. As I have already indicated, the book is notable for the narrowness of its authors™ intellectual horizons. In fact they seem to find it quite hard to look beyond Birming- ham. Their main inspiration is John Sinclair, former Professor of Modem English Language in Birmingham, whose name appears on almost every page. Thus, when 0378-2166/02/$ - see front matter 0 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved. PII: SOO24-3841(01)00042-O 236 Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 235-241 they make the point on page 129 that ﬁa proliferation of [participant] roles . . . is . . . undesirable in any analytic systemﬂ, they refer to Sinclair and Coulthard™s (1975) book on discourse analysis. It looks as if they think Occam™s razor was discovered in Birmingham in 1975. Similarly, when they refer on page 208 to ﬁseveral recent approachesﬂ they just cite Brazil™s (1995) book on grammar and speech, another Birmingham product. This point is not just an academic one. Hunston and Francis™s narrow horizons lead them to imagine that they are saying something new when they are in fact say- ing something that was said a long time ago. They remark that their grammar codes ﬁare a radical departure from those traditionally used in dictionaries, even learners™ dictionaries, in that they do not employ the usual metalanguage such as ‚transitive verb™ or ‚verb + object™. Instead a string of elements is given, each element rep- resenting an actual word (usually prepositions such as for or with, but sometimes other items such as way or the) or a type of clause or groupﬂ (p. 33). Later they suggest that ﬁ[tlhe approach to complementation patterns described in this book is new in that it focuses on the formal components of a pattern rather than on a structural interpretation of those components. For example, the coding V n is preferred to ‚Verb plus Object™ or ‚Verb plus complementﬂ™ (p. 151). It may well be true that Hunston and Francis™s codes are a departure from the normal practice in dictionaries, but the idea that they are new in some general way is very strange. In Chomsky (1965: 93), one finds the following: ﬁObserve that the feature specification [+Transitive] can be regarded as merely a notation indicating occurrence in the environment _NP. A more expressive notation would be simply the symbol ‚_NP™ itself. Generalising, let us allow certain features to be designated in the form [X-Y], where X and Y are strings (perhaps null) of symbols.ﬂ In short, Hunston and Francis™s ‚new™ approach is at least 35 years old. Hunston and Francis also think their work is novel in that ﬁthe notion of pattern is not restricted to verb complementation but is extended to all word classesﬂ (p. 151). But the idea that other word classes have complements goes back at least to Chom- sky (1970) and is a major theme in Jackendoff (1977). It has been generally accepted within mainstream linguistics ever since. See Radford (1988 : chapter 5) for textbook discussion. A major concern for Hunston and Francis is the relation between their patterns and meaning, which they discuss in chapters 4 and 5. Here too they think that old ideas are new. On page 20, they refer to ﬁSinclair™s observation that there is a close association between pattern and meaning, or between sense and syntaxﬂ. They seem to be referring here to Sinclair (1991). In similar vein, they remark on page 83 that ﬁ[o]ne of the most important observations in a corpus-driven description of English is that patterns and meanings are connectedﬂ. Apparently, then, they think that no one noticed any relation between selectional properties and meaning until the development of large corpora and especially the work of Sinclair (1991). If this is indeed their view, they could take a look at the discussion in Chomsky (1986: 86-90), where Chomsky suggests, following earlier work by Grimshaw and Peset- sky, that categorial selection (c-selection) is largely predictable from semantic Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 235-241 231 selection (s-selection). They could also look at earlier work in Montague grammar, e.g. Partee (1976), where a close connection between selection and meaning is a cen- tral assumption. Another important concern for Hunston and Francis is word classes, which they discuss in chapter 7. They remark that ﬁThere are two alternative ways of identifying word class: meaning (e.g. a noun denotes a person, place or thing), and pattern . . we will argue that word classes can be most easily identified on the basis of the behaviour of the words that constitute them.ﬂ (p. 179) They don™t seem to be aware that this is a position that any syntax textbook will argue for. Radford (1988: chapter 2.3) is a typical example. Later, they comment that ﬁThe basic problem is to create the right number of classes: too few mean that some words fit badly into a class and too many would lead to the map being as large as the area of land it represents.ﬂ (P. 197) It looks as if they think that a large number of word classes will miss generalizations. They will if word class labels are atomic elements with no internal structure, but most linguists have assumed since Chomsky (1965) that they are complex elements composed from features of various kinds. With such categories, generalizations can be captured even if the number of categories is very large. Hunston and Francis™s narrow horizons show up in a number of other places. For example, as noted earlier, they refer extensively to the notion of participant role in their discussion of meaning. They cite Fillmore (1968) and also refer to Halliday™s work but they mention no other work. In particular, they do not refer to Jackendoff™s extensive work in this area, or to Dowty™s work. Similarly, they argue in chapter 6 that not all PPs that follow a verb are adjuncts. One would not know from their dis- cussion that anyone had ever made this point before. However, it can be found in Chomsky (1965 : 105), Jackendoff (1977) and Radford (1988: chapter 5.2). A further example is in chapter 8, where Hunston and Francis advocate a ﬁlinear grammarﬂ, in which V n means not a ﬁverb followed by (the whole of) a noun phraseﬂ but ﬁa verb followed by (anything up to and including) a nounﬂ (pp. 210-211). They express various reservations here about a constituency analysis of sentences and they appear to be groping towards a dependency analysis, but they cite no dependency-based work. In particular, there is no mention of Hudson™s (1990) Word Grammar. There is one body of work from outside Birmingham to which Hunston and Fran- cis pay some real attention: the work of Quirk and his colleagues. This is a central focus in chapter 6, where they consider an alternative view of patterns based on the ideas about clause structure developed in Quirk et al. (1985), in which the notion object plays a central role. They argue that this is not a very useful notion. They characterize an object as follows: ﬁAn Object (in an active clause) realises a person or thing involved in the action but not responsible for the action. It may be a nominal group or a non-finite clause. When an active clause has a passive equiv- alent, the Object of the active clause is equivalent to the subject of the Passive clause.ﬂ (p. 152) 238 Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 235-241 This is a very strange characterization. One problem is that a nonagentive subject such as the door in The door opened arguably realises ‚a person or thing involved in the action but not responsible for the action™ but is presumably not an object. Another arises from the following examples: (1) a. They expect it to be raining. b. It is expected to be raining. (2) a. They expect there to be a problem. b. There is expected to be a problem. It and there are in post-verbal position in the (a) examples and are in subject position in the (b) examples. This suggests that they may be objects in the (a) examples. However, as expletives, they clearly do not realise ‚a person or thing involved in the action but not responsible for the action™. A further problem arises in connection with the idea that a non-finite clause is an object. As far as I am aware, non-finite clause complements never correspond to passive subjects. The following are typical: (3) a. Kim wants to go. b. * To go is wanted by Kim. In contrast, finite clause complements do sometimes correspond to a passive subject, as the following show: (4) a. Many people regretted that Kim was sacked. b. That Kim was sacked was regretted by many people. However, Hunston and Francis claim that finite clause complements are never objects. In fact they suggest (pp. 155-156) that what looks like the clausal complement of a verb ﬁis not a subordinate clause or an embedded clauseﬂ. They note that it ﬁencodes what is often the main information of the sentenceﬂ and propose - following a suggestion of Sinclair™s - that it is ﬁin a sense the ‚main clause™ of the sentenceﬂ with the preceding subject and verb ‚a contextualising ﬁprefaceﬂ‚. It looks, then, as if they want to suggest that we have structures like (5) and not structures like (6). (5) [I agree] [s that the project has possibilities] (6) Is I agree [s that the project has possibilities]] One wonders what they would say about the following: (7) It will be a long time before [I agree that the project has possibilities] (8) I met some people [who agree that the project has possibilities] (9) If [they agree that the project has possibilities], we will pursue it. It would be difficult to claim that the apparent complement of agree in these exam- ples is a main clause. In fact it is fairly clear that the apparent clausal complement of Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 235-241 239 such verbs is really a complement. Pairs of sentences like those in (4) point to this conclusion. So do the following: (10) a. What was he doing? b. * What he was doing? (11) a. I asked what was he doing. b. I asked what he was doing. These examples show that subject-auxiliary inversion is obligatory in a w/z-interrogative which is a main clause, but not in a &-interrogative which an apparent complement (where in fact it is impossible except in a case of free indirect speech). The obvious con- clusion is that the apparent complement is a real complement. I conclude that the idea that the apparent clausal complement of a verb like hope, regret and ask is really a main clause is quite untenable. What looks like a complement is really a complement. Hunston and Francis™s discussion of the notion object shows one thing: that a thoroughly muddled notion of object is not very useful. It shows nothing about the value of better thought out notions, e.g. the notion of object in Lexical-Functional Grammar. Although Hunston and Francis reject some of the analytic assumptions of Quirk et al., they accept one notable assumption uncritically. This is the assumption that English has a ‚verb-group™, a constituent consisting of a number of verbal elements together perhaps with infinitival to. This is an important aspect of chapter 6. Thus, they assume that (12) has the structure indicated. (12) He [remembered to buy] his wife chocolates. A similar constituent except that all elements except the last is an auxiliary was assumed in Chomsky (1957). However, it became clear during the 1970s that there are numerous objections to such a constituent. Radford (1988: ch. 3, exercise IX) provides a good textbook illustration. But if there are good objections to Chomsky™s verb-group, there are certainly good objections to the verb-group assumed by Hun- ston and Francis. In fact, Hunston and Francis suggest that two different analyses are appropriate for the sequence verb + to-infinitive. They propose that it is a verb group where ﬁthe meaning of the pattern is that the action realised by the second verb either is or is not doneﬂ but not where ﬁthe pattern does not indicate whether or not the action realised by the second verb is doneﬂ (p. 172). This is a very unclear distinc- tion. Hunston and Francis suggest that hesitate, tend and try appear in the first pat- tern, and agree, aim, decide and hope, in the second. Thus, they think that (13) indi- cates that the action realised by the second verb is or is not done, but that (14) does not (and hence that (13) but not (14) involves a verb group). (13) Kim tried to impress Lee. (14) Kim hoped to impress Lee. On the face of it, however, both sentences could be followed by either and he was successful or but he was unsuccessful. Thus, it is not obvious that there is any 240 Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 235-241 important semantic difference between them. Even if there was, it would not follow that there is a syntactic difference, and as far as I can see, Hunston and Francis pro- vide no evidence for such a distinction. The muddled nature of this discussion is perhaps another result of Hunston and Francis™s narrow horizons. If they had taken mainstream linguistics more seriously, they might have absorbed some of the analytic rigour that is a feature of most main- stream work. They might then have managed a less confused discussion of these matters. It is natural to wonder why Hunston and Francis ignore mainstream linguistics so completely. One might speculate that they believe mainstream work is fundamen- tally flawed because it is largely based on intuitions. They call their corpus data ﬁauthenticﬂ (p. 15), and it may well be that they would claim that intuitive data is inauthentic. However, the attitude to intuitions in their work as in other corpus linguistics is a curious one. They are actually quite happy to make use of certain sorts of intuition. They remark on page 17 that ﬁ[olne of the outcomes of using large quan- tities of data is that some of it may be discarded, in the sense that instances of word play or language that is strange because it is being used in strange circumstances, are deliberately ignored in terms of the general description of the languageﬂ. How do they know when some data is an instance of word play or a case of language being used in strange circumstances ? The answer must be through their intuitions. They also highlight cases where ﬁa pattern does not directly accompany the word that it ‚belongs toﬂ™ (p. 68). For example, they compare the following examples: (15) He expressed satisfaction that the judge was obviously . . . (16) Yul decided to his own satisfaction that the sickness was . . . In (15) the that clause is a complement of the immediately preceding noun satisfac- tion, but in (16) it is complement not of satisfaction but of the verb decided. Again the question is how do they know this? Again the answer must be through their in- tuitions. As noted earlier, Hunston and Francis also discuss meaning at some length. Clearly they only know about meanings through their intuitions. Thus, they have no general objection to the use of intuitions. ™ Hence, it is hard to see how they could object to research just because it makes more use of intuitions than they do. More- over, even if mainstream linguistics was methodologically flawed, it would not fol- low that all ideas emanating from mainstream work could be safely ignored. Arguably, there is one feature of this book which is even more striking than the authors™ ignoring of work on English grammar within mainstream linguistics. This is that they see absolutely no need to offer any justification for it. The conclusion must be that this is acceptable in some circles. In fact, it is not hard to find other books with the same property. A notable example is Sinclair (1991). This is an unfortunate situation, and not just for mainstream linguists. At a time when increasing use is being made of corpus data in mainstream linguistics, those who have been working ™ The observation that those who object to the use of intuition in fact make extensive use of it is not a new one. It was made in typically forceful fashion in Postal (1969). Book review I Lingua 112 (2002) 235-241 241 with such data for some time might hope for a new audience among mainstream linguists. But they are unlikely to be taken seriously if they systematically ignore mainstream work. References Brazil, D., 1995. A grammar of speech. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Chomsky, N.A., 1957. Syntactic structures. The Hague: Mouton. Chomsky, N.A., 1965. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Chomsky, N.A., 1970. Remarks on nominalization. In: R. Jacobs and P.S. Rosenbaum (eds.), Readings in English Transformational Grammar. Waltham, MA: Ginn&Co. Chomsky, N.A., 1986. Knowledge of language. New York: Praeger. Fillmore, C.J., 1968. The case for case. In: E. Bach and R.T. Harms (eds.), Universals in linguistic the- ory. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Huddleston, R.D., 1984. Introduction to the grammar of English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Hudson, R., 1990. English word grammar. Oxford: Blackwell. Jackendoff, R.S., 1977. X,-syntax: A study of phrase structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Partee, B.H., 1976. Montague grammar. New York: Academic Press. Postal, P.M., 1969. Review essay on Angus McIntosh, M.A.K. Halliday and P.D. Strevens (1964), Pat- terns of language: Papers in general, descriptive and applied linguistics. Foundations of Language 5, 409-426. Quirk, R., S. Greenbaum, G. Leech and S. Svartvik, 1985. A comprehensive grammar of the English lan- guage. London: Longman. Radford, A., 1988. Transformational grammar: A first course. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Sinclair, J.M., 1991. Corpus, concordance, collocation. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Sinclair, J.M. and M. Coulthard, 1975. Towards an analysis of discourse. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 